	So may it come, thy master, whom thou lovest,
	Attendants]
	Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,

	That hast within thee undivulged crimes,
EDMUND	How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to
	or not I the detector!
EDMUND	If the matter of this paper be certain, you have
	Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
	stuff his suspicion more fully.--I will persevere in
CORNWALL	I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a
	Some that will thank you, making just report
	And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer

	What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,--
	I will go seek the king.
KENT	Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet;




	[Enter KING LEAR and Fool]
	Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!
	Smite flat the thick rotundity o' the world!
Fool	O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry

ALBANY	That's but a trifle here.
	During the life of this old majesty,

	The wages of their virtue, and all foes
	Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
	Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,


	That would upon the rack of this tough world

ALBANY	Bear them from hence. Our present business

KENT	I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
	Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
	[Exeunt, with a dead march]
	Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
	Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
	A little to disquantity your train;

	Yet have I left a daughter.


	Is it your will? Speak, sir. Prepare my horses.

	My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
	How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
	Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in,
	And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
	And follows but for form,
	And let the wise man fly:
KENT	Where learned you this, fool?
	[Re-enter KING LEAR with GLOUCESTER]
	The images of revolt and flying off.
	You know the fiery quality of the duke;
KING LEAR	Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
GLOUCESTER	Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
GLOUCESTER	Ay, my good lord.
	Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
	Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves
	To take the indisposed and sickly fit

	Go tell the duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them,


	when she put 'em i' the paste alive; she knapped 'em



	I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
	[To KENT]
	Thy sister's naught: O Regan, she hath tied

REGAN	I pray you, sir, take patience: I have hope.
KING LEAR	Say, how is that?
	She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,
KING LEAR	My curses on her!
	want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered.
	the place for your labour.
	O undistinguish'd space of woman's will!
	Of murderous lechers: and in the mature time

	That can my speech defuse, my good intent
	Our means secure us, and our mere defects
	I'ld say I had eyes again!
EDGAR	[Aside]  O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at
Old Man	'Tis poor mad Tom.



KENT	Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
KENT	Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
GLOUCESTER	No words, no words: hush.
	I smell the blood of a British man.







	To make this creature fruitful!
	A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
	With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks;
	To have a thankless child! Away, away!
ALBANY	Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
	That dotage gives it.
KING LEAR	What, fifty of my followers at a clap!

	[To GONERIL]
	That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
	Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,
	Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:
	That to our sister you do make return;
	Do you but mark how this becomes the house:

REGAN	Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks:
	She hath abated me of half my train;
	On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,

	To fall and blast her pride!

	Do comfort and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
	Against my coming in: thou better know'st
	Wherein I thee endow'd.
KING LEAR	Who put my man i' the stocks?
CORNWALL	What trumpet's that?



	Thou didst not know on't. Who comes here? O heavens,
	If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
	[To GONERIL]


CORNWALL	I set him there, sir: but his own disorders

	Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
KING LEAR	Return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd?
	Necessity's sharp pinch! Return with her?
	To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
	[Pointing at OSWALD]
KING LEAR	I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:
	Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
	Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:
	I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
	I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided
	But she knows what she does.
REGAN	I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?
	Should many people, under two commands,
	From those that she calls servants or from mine?
	For now I spy a danger,--I entreat you
KING LEAR	I gave you all--
KING LEAR	Made you my guardians, my depositaries;

	When others are more wicked: not being the worst


	Have a command to tend you?
KING LEAR	O, reason not the need: our basest beggars
	If only to go warm were gorgeous,
	You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
	To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
	That all the world shall--I will do such things,--

	In the restoring his bereaved sense?
	Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,

	In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him;
	[Enter a Messenger]

	Therefore great France
	Soon may I hear and see him!






REGAN	Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
REGAN	What might import my sister's letter to him?
REGAN	'Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
	In pity of his misery, to dispatch
	The strength o' the enemy.
REGAN	Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us;
	My lady charged my duty in this business.
	Something--I know not what: I'll love thee much,

	To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
REGAN	I speak in understanding; you are; I know't:

	That I may speak: I'll write straight to my sister,

	KING LEAR


	So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,
EDGAR	Give me your hand:
	Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum:

	KING LEAR

	soft music playing; Gentleman, and others attending.




	Till time and I think meet.
	[To the Doctor]
Doctor	Madam, sleeps still.
	The untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up
	That we may wake the king: he hath slept long.

Doctor	Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;

	Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss
KENT	Kind and dear princess!
	To be opposed against the warring winds?
	With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
	In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
Doctor	Madam, do you; 'tis fittest.
KING LEAR	You do me wrong to take me out o' the grave:



	I will not swear these are my hands: let's see;
CORDELIA	                  O, look upon me, sir,
KING LEAR	Pray, do not mock me:
	I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
	Remembers not these garments; nor I know not

	If you have poison for me, I will drink it.



	Desire him to go in; trouble him no more

	[Exeunt all but KENT and Gentleman]
KENT	Most certain, sir.
KENT	As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

Gentleman	The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you

	[Exit]

ACT V
SCENE I	The British camp, near Dover.
	Gentlemen, and Soldiers.
	To change the course: he's full of alteration


	Do you not love my sister?
REGAN	But have you never found my brother's way

EDMUND	No, by mine honour, madam.

	[Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers]

	Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
	Your horrible pleasure: here I stand, your slave,
	Your high engender'd battles 'gainst a head
	head-piece.
	So beggars marry many.
	And turn his sleep to wake.
KING LEAR	No, I will be the pattern of all patience;

	man and a fool.
	Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
	That under covert and convenient seeming
	More sinn'd against than sinning.
	Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest:
	Denied me to come in--return, and force
	Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold?
	your hovel.
Fool	[Singing]
	Must make content with his fortunes fit,

	I'll speak a prophecy ere I go:
	No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
	Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
	Come to great confusion:




	[Enter GLOUCESTER and EDMUND]
	pity him, they took from me the use of mine own

	the dukes; and a worse matter than that: I have
	home; there's part of a power already footed: we
	if he ask for me. I am ill, and gone to bed.

	Instantly know; and of that letter too:




	[Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool]
	For nature to endure.
KING LEAR	Let me alone.
KING LEAR	Wilt break my heart?
KING LEAR	Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
	But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
	Doth from my senses take all feeling else
	No, I will weep no more. In such a night
	O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;


	Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
	Poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are,
	From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
	And show the heavens more just.
	[The Fool runs out from the hovel]


	[Enter EDGAR disguised as a mad man]
	Hum! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.

	that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters
	traitor. Bless thy five wits! Tom's a-cold,--O, do
	have him now,--and there,--and there again, and there.
KING LEAR	What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?

KENT	He hath no daughters, sir.
	Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers

Fool	This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
	man's sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud

	her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and
	out-paramoured the Turk: false of heart, light of
	silks betray thy poor heart to woman: keep thy foot
	Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.

	owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep
	forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings!

	rest on's body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.
EDGAR	This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins
	poor creature of earth.
	And her troth plight,


	the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in
	standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to
	But mice and rats, and such small deer,
GLOUCESTER	What, hath your grace no better company?

EDGAR	Poor Tom's a-cold.
	Though their injunction be to bar my doors,

KENT	Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.


GLOUCESTER	Canst thou blame him?
	His daughters seek his death: ah, that good Kent!
	Now outlaw'd from my blood; he sought my life,
	I do beseech your grace,--


	head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in
GLOUCESTER	I see it feelingly.
	justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in

	mightst behold the great image of authority: a
	Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind
	And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks:
	To seal the accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes;

	I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester:

	To this great stage of fools: this a good block;
	Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
Gentleman	O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,
	The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
Gentleman	You shall have any thing.
	To use his eyes for garden water-pots,


	shall get it with running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
Gentleman	A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,


	Which can distinguish sound.



	And top extremity.
	Who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms
	That ever ear received: which in recounting

	Follow'd his enemy king, and did him service



ALBANY	Who dead? speak, man.

EDGAR	Here comes Kent.
	Touches us not with pity.
	[Enter KENT]
	Which very manners urges.
	Is he not here?
	See'st thou this object, Kent?
KENT	Alack, why thus?
	And after slew herself.
EDMUND	I pant for life: some good I mean to do,
	Nay, send in time.
EDGAR	To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send
	Give it the captain.
	[Exit EDGAR]
	To lay the blame upon her own despair,

	EDGAR, Captain, and others following]
	That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever!
	Why, then she lives.
	For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
KING LEAR	No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison:
	And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
	And take upon's the mystery of things,

	The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
	Ere they shall make us weep: we'll see 'em starve

	[Giving a paper]
	As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
	Will not bear question; either say thou'lt do 't,


	[Exit]

	We do require them of you, so to use them
EDMUND	Sir, I thought it fit
	To pluck the common bosom on his side,
	To-morrow, or at further space, to appear
	By those that feel their sharpness:
ALBANY	Sir, by your patience,
REGAN	                  That's as we list to grace him.
	The which immediacy may well stand up,
	In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
	Than for your lady's: you may gather more.
	So, fare you well.
OSWALD	Would I could meet him, madam! I should show




	[Enter GLOUCESTER, and EDGAR dressed like a peasant]
EDGAR	You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.
EDGAR	Horrible steep.
	Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
REGAN	Why is this reason'd?
	Are not the question here.




ALBANY	                  I'll overtake you. Speak.
EDGAR	Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
	What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
ALBANY	Stay till I have read the letter.
	And I'll appear again.
	[Exit EDGAR]
EDMUND	The enemy's in view; draw up your powers.


	Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
	Her husband being alive. Now then we'll use
	Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,




	[Alarum within. Enter, with drum and colours,
	[Enter EDGAR and GLOUCESTER]
	If ever I return to you again,



	Their going hence, even as their coming hither;




	[Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, EDMUND,
EDMUND	Some officers take them away: good guard,
	On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,


	Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,
	Old fools are babes again; and must be used
	Thou losest here, a better where to find.
	That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
	[Flourish. Exeunt all but KING OF FRANCE, GONERIL,

	Your faults as they are named. Use well our father:
	So, farewell to you both.
GONERIL	Let your study




	observation we have made of it hath not been

GONERIL	The best and soundest of his time hath been but
	that infirm and choleric years bring with them.

	such dispositions as he bears, this last


	KING LEAR


EDMUND	Thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law
	For that I am some twelve or fourteen moon-shines
	As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
	Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
	Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
	Shall top the legitimate. I grow; I prosper:

	Upon the gad! Edmund, how now! what news?
	[Putting up the letter]
EDMUND	I know no news, my lord.
EDMUND	Nothing, my lord.
	not such need to hide itself. Let's see: come,
	from my brother, that I have not all o'er-read;
GLOUCESTER	Give me the letter, sir.

	this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
	our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish
	me, that of this I may speak more. If our father

	to breed it in?--When came this to you? who
	cunning of it; I found it thrown in at the


	not in the contents.
EDMUND	Never, my lord: but I have heard him oft

	seek him; I'll apprehend him: abominable villain!
	you to suspend your indignation against my
	him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great
	No, I'll not weep:


	Cannot be well bestow'd.

GONERIL	So am I purposed.





	He is attended with a desperate train;
CORNWALL	Shut up your doors, my lord; 'tis a wild night:






	That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
	The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
	And bids what will take all.
Gentleman	None but the fool; who labours to out-jest
	And dare, upon the warrant of my note,
	Who have--as who have not, that their great stars
	Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
	But, true it is, from France there comes a power
	To show their open banner. Now to you:
	With his prepared sword, he charges home
	Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
	Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
	That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
EDMUND	When I dissuaded him from his intent,
	If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
	My very character,--I'ld turn it all
	Were very pregnant and potential spurs
	Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
	Hark, the duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
	May have the due note of him; and of my land,
	[Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, and Attendants]

GLOUCESTER	O, madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!

	That tend upon my father?
EDMUND	Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
	To have the expense and waste of his revenues.
	I'll not be there.
	A child-like office.
GLOUCESTER	He did bewray his practise; and received

	Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpose,
	Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
	Truly, however else.
CORNWALL	You know not why we came to visit you,--
	Wherein we must have use of your advice:
	From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,

	[Exeunt]

ACT II
SCENE II	Before Gloucester's castle.




	care for me.
KENT	Fellow, I know thee.
KENT	A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a
	glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue;
	and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch: one whom I
OSWALD	Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail
	knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up
	draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw.
OSWALD	Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
	royalty of her father: draw, you rogue, or I'll so

	[Beating him]
	[Enter EDMUND, with his rapier drawn, CORNWALL,

GLOUCESTER	Weapons! arms! What 's the matter here?


	cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a





	[Enter KENT and a Gentleman]

	fear and danger, that his personal return was

	demonstration of grief?
	Her delicate cheek: it seem'd she was a queen
KENT	O, then it moved her.
	Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
	As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief,
KENT	Made she no verbal question?
	Cried 'Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!
	And clamour moisten'd: then away she started
	The stars above us, govern our conditions;
Gentleman	No.
Gentleman	No, since.
	What we are come about, and by no means

	To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting
Gentleman	Alack, poor gentleman!
Gentleman	'Tis so, they are afoot.
	Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;


ACT IV
SCENE IV	The same. A tent.

	With bur-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,
	By me invested, he compeers the best.
REGAN	Jesters do oft prove prophets.

	Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:
GONERIL	Mean you to enjoy him?
EDMUND	Nor in thine, lord.
REGAN	[To EDMUND]  Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
	This gilded serpent
	For your claim, fair sister,
	If you will marry, make your loves to me,

	There is my pledge;
	I'll prove it on thy heart,
REGAN	Sick, O, sick!
EDMUND	There's my exchange:
		what in the world he is
	My truth and honour firmly.
EDMUND	                  A herald, ho, a herald!
	Took their discharge.
ALBANY	She is not well; convey her to my tent.
	[Enter a Herald]


	traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the




ALBANY	Ask him his purposes, why he appears
	Your name, your quality? and why you answer
	By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit:
ALBANY	                  Which is that adversary?
EDMUND	Himself: what say'st thou to him?
	Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.
	Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
	And, from the extremest upward of thy head
	To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
	But, since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
	Back do I toss these treasons to thy head;
	Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
ALBANY	Save him, save him!
	An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquish'd,
	Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir:
	[Gives the letter to EDMUND]

GONERIL	Ask me not what I know.
ALBANY	Go after her: she's desperate; govern her.
	'Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
EDGAR	                  Let's exchange charity.
	The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices

ALBANY	Methought thy very gait did prophesy

	How have you known the miseries of your father?
	The bloody proclamation to escape,
	Into a madman's rags; to assume a semblance
	Led him, begg'd for him, saved him from despair;
	I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last
	Burst smilingly.

EDGAR	I thank you, sir: that's all.




	I'll lead you to some biding.
	To boot, and boot!
OSWALD	A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
	That must destroy thee.

	Darest thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence;
EDGAR	Ch'ill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.
EDGAR	Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk
	ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be

EDGAR	Or image of that horror?
KING LEAR	This feather stirs; she lives! if it be so,
KENT	[Kneeling]  O my good master!
EDGAR	'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
	Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!

	I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion

KING LEAR	This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?

KENT	No, my good lord; I am the very man,--
KENT	That, from your first of difference and decay,


	That we present us to him.
	[Enter a Captain]
KING LEAR	Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready.
	How now! what art thou?
KING LEAR	What dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?
	that is honest; to converse with him that is wise,
KING LEAR	What art thou?
KING LEAR	If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a


	which I would fain call master.
KENT	Authority.
KENT	I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious

	so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years
	worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet.
	[Exit an Attendant]
	You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
	[Exit]
	[Exit a Knight]
	[Re-enter Knight]
Knight	He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
Knight	Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would

	great abatement of kindness appears as well in the
KING LEAR	Ha! sayest thou so?
	highness wronged.
	have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity

KING LEAR	No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you, and


	sir?
KING LEAR	'My lady's father'! my lord's knave: your



	love thee.
	length again, tarry: but away! go to; have you

	[Giving KENT money]
Fool	Let me hire him too: here's my coxcomb.
KING LEAR	How now, my pretty knave! how dost thou?
KENT	Why, fool?
	thou'lt catch cold shortly: there, take my coxcomb:
	How now, nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
Fool	If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs

KING LEAR	A pestilent gall to me!
KING LEAR	Do.
	Speak less than thou knowest,
	Set less than thou throwest;
	Than two tens to a score.
Fool	Then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer; you
KING LEAR	Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of nothing.

	bitter fool and a sweet fool?
Fool	That lord that counsell'd thee
	The sweet and bitter fool

	thou wast born with.
Fool	No, faith, lords and great men will not let me; if
	nuncle, and I'll give thee two crowns.
Fool	Why, after I have cut the egg i' the middle, and eat
	the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown,


	To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out


	Let's see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of
	To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;


	Their manners are so apish.
Fool	I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy
	[Singing]
	That such a king should play bo-peep,
	thy fool to lie: I would fain learn to lie.
Fool	I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are:
	kind o' thing than a fool: and yet I would not be

	Methinks you are too much of late i' the frown.
	figure: I am better than thou art now; I am a fool,

	Weary of all, shall want some.
	That's a shealed peascod.
	Do hourly carp and quarrel; breaking forth
	By what yourself too late have spoke and done.
	Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,

	So, out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
GONERIL	Come, sir,
	From what you rightly are.

	Are lethargied--Ha! waking? 'tis not so.





EDGAR	None at all.
	till some little time hath qualified the heat of

	forbearance till the spied of his rage goes
	if you do stir abroad, go armed.
EDMUND	Brother, I advise you to the best; go armed: I
	and horror of it: pray you, away.
EDMUND	I do serve you in this business.
	A credulous father! and a brother noble,
	Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit:

	KING LEAR


GONERIL	Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
GONERIL	By day and night he wrongs me; every hour
	And in the end meet the old course of death,
	To lead him where he would: his roguish madness
	To apply to his bleeding face. Now, heaven help him!




	Than still contemn'd and flatter'd. To be worst,
	The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,

	But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
	your father's tenant, these fourscore years.
	Thee they may hurt.
	affection to your honour, and to no further

	that without any further delay than this very evening.
EDMUND	Nor is not, sure.
	out: wind me into him, I pray you: frame the
EDMUND	I will seek him, sir, presently: convey the
	no good to us: though the wisdom of nature can
	cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in
	falls from bias of nature; there's father against
	graves. Find out this villain, Edmund; it shall

	when we are sick in fortune,--often the surfeit
	heavenly compulsion; knaves, thieves, and
	by a divine thrusting on: an admirable evasion
	dragon's tail; and my nativity was under Ursa
	twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar--
	And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old

EDMUND	I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read

	ancient amities; divisions in state, menaces and

	KING LEAR

KING OF FRANCE:
DUKE OF CORNWALL	(CORNWALL:)
EARL OF KENT	(KENT:)
EDGAR	son to Gloucester.
CURAN	a courtier.
Doctor:
OSWALD	steward to Goneril.
	Gentleman attendant on Cordelia. (Gentleman:)
	(First Servant:)

	|
	Knights of Lear's train, Captains, Messengers,
	(Messenger:)
SCENE	Britain.

ACT I
SCENE I	King Lear's palace.

GLOUCESTER	It did always seem so to us: but now, in the
	of either's moiety.
GLOUCESTER	His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I have
KENT	I cannot conceive you.
	for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed.
	being so proper.
	though this knave came something saucily into the
	noble gentleman, Edmund?
GLOUCESTER	My lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my


	[Sennet. Enter KING LEAR, CORNWALL, ALBANY,


	To shake all cares and business from our age;
	We have this hour a constant will to publish
	Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
	Which of you shall we say doth love us most?

	No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;

LEAR	Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
	Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,
	Of the self-same metal that my sister is,
	Myself an enemy to all other joys,


	Than that conferr'd on Goneril. Now, our joy,
	A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.
KING LEAR	Nothing!
KING LEAR	Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.
	According to my bond; nor more nor less.

	Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
	Half my love with him, half my care and duty:
KING LEAR	But goes thy heart with this?
KING LEAR	So young, and so untender?
KING LEAR	Let it be so; thy truth, then, be thy dower:
	From whom we do exist, and cease to be;
	Hold thee, from this, for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
	As thou my sometime daughter.
KING LEAR	Peace, Kent!
	So be my grave my peace, as here I give
	Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
	With reservation of an hundred knights,
	I warrant thee.
GONERIL	Do you mark that, my lord?


	with thee.
	If my cap would buy a halter:

	Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
ALBANY	Well, you may fear too far.
	Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.

	What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
GONERIL	Take you some company, and away to horse:
	And hasten your return.
		  No, no, my lord,
	Than praised for harmful mildness.





	[Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool]
	know than comes from her demand out of the letter.
	your letter.
Fool	If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in

KING LEAR	Ha, ha, ha!
	apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
Fool	She will taste as like this as a crab does to a
KING LEAR	No.



	daughters, and leave his horns without a case.

KING LEAR	Because they are not eight?
KING LEAR	To take 't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!

	been wise.



	[Exeunt]

ACT II
SCENE I	GLOUCESTER's castle.

	given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan


	Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?
CURAN	You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.
EDMUND	The duke be here to-night? The better! best!
	Which I must act: briefness and fortune, work!

	Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
	Advise yourself.
EDMUND	I hear my father coming: pardon me:
	Fly, brother. Torches, torches! So, farewell.
	Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.
	Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, and Servants with torches]
EDMUND	Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
GLOUCESTER	But where is he?
GLOUCESTER	Where is the villain, Edmund?
GLOUCESTER	Pursue him, ho! Go after.
		     By no means what?
	'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
	To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion,
GLOUCESTER	No, truly.


GLOUCESTER	Methinks you're better spoken.
	The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
	The fishermen, that walk upon the beach,
	That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes,

	Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon
	Here, friend, 's another purse; in it a jewel


GLOUCESTER	[Kneeling]  O you mighty gods!
	To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,

	And yet I know not how conceit may rob
	Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak!
GLOUCESTER	                  Away, and let me die.
	Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg: but thou dost breathe;
	Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.
EDGAR	From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
GLOUCESTER	Alack, I have no eyes.
	And frustrate his proud will.

	Upon the crown o' the cliff, what thing was that

	It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,
GLOUCESTER	I do remember now: henceforth I'll bear
	'The fiend, the fiend:' he led me to that place.
	[Enter KING LEAR, fantastically dressed with wild flowers]

EDGAR	O thou side-piercing sight!
	crow-keeper: draw me a clothier's yard. Look,
	flown, bird! i' the clout, i' the clout: hewgh!


	and 'no' to every thing that I said!--'Ay' and 'no'
	found 'em, there I smelt 'em out. Go to, they are
GLOUCESTER	The trick of that voice I do well remember:
	When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
	Does lecher in my sight.
	To 't, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
	To hear of pleasure's name;
	Though women all above:
	sulphurous pit,
	there's money for thee.
KING LEAR	Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.

	penning of it.
EDGAR	I would not take this from report; it is,
GLOUCESTER	Is it a beggar-man?
GLOUCESTER	He has some reason, else he could not beg.
	Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard


	[Exeunt]

ACT III
SCENE VI	A chamber in a farmhouse adjoining the castle.


	[Exit GLOUCESTER]
	Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.

	for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman
	Come hissing in upon 'em,--
Fool	He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a





	food for thee.



	[To KENT]

	And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,
KING LEAR	Arraign her first; 'tis Goneril. I here take my
Fool	Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
Fool	Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
	Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!

EDGAR	[Aside]  My tears begin to take his part so much,
	Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.
	Tooth that poisons if it bite;
	Tom will make them weep and wail:
	fairs and market-towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.
	makes these hard hearts?
	You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only I
KENT	Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.



	And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
	Stand in assured loss: take up, take up;
KENT	Oppressed nature sleeps:

	Thou must not stay behind.
	[Exeunt all but EDGAR]
	Who alone suffers suffers most i' the mind,
	How light and portable my pain seems now,
	When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,




	[Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, and Servants]
	out the villain Gloucester.
REGAN	Hang him instantly.
CORNWALL	Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our
	a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the


	Who, with some other of the lords dependants,
CORNWALL	Get horses for your mistress.
CORNWALL	Edmund, farewell.
	Go seek the traitor Gloucester,

	May blame, but not control. Who's there? the traitor?
REGAN	Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
GLOUCESTER	What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider



	To pluck me by the beard.
GLOUCESTER	Naughty lady,
	You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
REGAN	Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.

	Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,




	Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
	And quench'd the stelled fires:
	All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see
	Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.


	Than now to bid you hold.
First Servant	If you did wear a beard upon your chin,



	[Dies]


	Who is too good to pity thee.

	[Exit one with GLOUCESTER]
CORNWALL	I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.

	The name, and all the additions to a king;

	Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
KING LEAR	The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.
	When Lear is mad. What wilt thou do, old man?
	And, in thy best consideration, cheque
	Reverbs no hollowness.
KENT	My life I never held but as a pawn
KING LEAR	Out of my sight!

	Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
	[Laying his hand on his sword]
	|  Dear sir, forbear.
KENT	Do:
	I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
	Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,
	Our potency made good, take thy reward.
	Upon our kingdom: if, on the tenth day following,

	[To CORDELIA]

	That good effects may spring from words of love.
	[Exit]

	We first address towards you, who with this king


	If aught within that little seeming substance,

	Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
BURGUNDY	Pardon me, royal sir;
	I tell you all her wealth.
		     For you, great king,
	Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed
	That she, that even but now was your best object,
	So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence
	Must be a faith that reason without miracle
	If for I want that glib and oily art,
	No unchaste action, or dishonour'd step,
	As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
	Hadst not been born than not to have pleased me better.
	That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,
	She is herself a dowry.
	And here I take Cordelia by the hand,

CORDELIA	Peace be with Burgundy!
KING OF FRANCE	Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
	Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
Old Man	Ay, my lord.
	I' the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
Old Man	Alack, sir, he is mad.
	Above the rest, be gone.





	fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of lust, as
	and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master!
	Makes thee the happier: heavens, deal so still!
	So distribution should undo excess,

	And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
EDGAR	Give me thy arm:

	KING LEAR


GONERIL	Welcome, my lord: I marvel our mild husband

	I told him of the army that was landed;
	When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot,

	Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
	Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant

	Would stretch thy spirits up into the air:





	That nature, which contemns its origin,
	And come to deadly use.
ALBANY	Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile:
	Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
	If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
	Like monsters of the deep.
	Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
	France spreads his banners in our noiseless land;


	Be-monster not thy feature. Were't my fitness
	A woman's shape doth shield thee.
	[Enter a Messenger]
Messenger	O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall's dead:
ALBANY	Gloucester's eye!
	To his great master; who, thereat enraged,

	Lost he his other eye?
	'Tis from your sister.
	May all the building in my fancy pluck
	[Exit]
Messenger	Come with my lady hither.
Messenger	No, my good lord; I met him back again.
Messenger	Ay, my good lord; 'twas he inform'd against him;
ALBANY	Gloucester, I live

	at suit of his gray beard,--
	unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of
	You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
CORNWALL	Why art thou angry?
	Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain
	Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
	Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
CORNWALL	Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
KENT	No contraries hold more antipathy


	Before me at this instant.
	A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
	These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness

	On flickering Phoebus' front,--
KENT	To go out of my dialect, which you
	I will not be, though I should win your displeasure

	When he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure,
	For him attempting who was self-subdued;
KENT	None of these rogues and cowards
	You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,
	Call not your stocks for me: I serve the king;
	Stocking his messenger.

	You should not use me so.
CORNWALL	This is a fellow of the self-same colour

	Is such as basest and contemned'st wretches
	Should have him thus restrain'd.
REGAN	My sister may receive it much more worse,
	[KENT is put in the stocks]
	[Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER and KENT]
	Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd: I'll entreat for thee.
	A good man's fortune may grow out at heels:

	Thou out of heaven's benediction comest
	Peruse this letter! Nothing almost sees miracles
	From this enormous state, seeking to give
	Fortune, good night: smile once more: turn thy wheel!




	And by the happy hollow of a tree
	I will preserve myself: and am bethought
	Blanket my loins: elf all my hair in knots;
	Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
	Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,




	[Enter KING LEAR, Fool, and Gentleman]


	Makest thou this shame thy pastime?
Fool	Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied
	nether-stocks.

KING LEAR	No.
KING LEAR	No, I say.
KING LEAR	No, no, they would not.
KING LEAR	By Jupiter, I swear, no.
KING LEAR	They durst not do 't;
	Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,
	I did commend your highness' letters to them,
	From Goneril his mistress salutations;
	Commanded me to follow, and attend
	Being the very fellow that of late
	Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
	Fathers that wear rags
	Fortune, that arrant whore,


	Stay here.
Gentleman	Made you no more offence but what you speak of?

KENT	Why, fool?
	their noses are led by their eyes but blind men; and
	following it: but the great one that goes up the
