	Requires a fitter place.


	I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,




	If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
	Attendants]
	That way, I'll this,--he that first lights on him


SCENE II	Another part of the heath. Storm still.
KING LEAR	Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!
	Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
Fool	O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry
KING LEAR	Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
	Your horrible pleasure: here I stand, your slave,
	So old and white as this. O! O! 'tis foul!



	That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
	Hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear!
	And from her derogate body never spring
	With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks;

GONERIL	Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
	And call itself your brother.
	Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:
	Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:


	His way to Dover.



Second Servant	Let's follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam
	To apply to his bleeding face. Now, heaven help him!

ACT IV

	Than still contemn'd and flatter'd. To be worst,
	Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace!

REGAN	Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:
	To answer from our home; the several messengers





OSWALD	Where may we set our horses?

KENT	If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee
KENT	Fellow, I know thee.
	base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited,
	bawd, in way of good service, and art nothing but

	knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up
	Who, with best meaning, have incurr'd the worst.
KING LEAR	No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison:
	At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
	In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones,
KING LEAR	Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
	Ere they shall make us weep: we'll see 'em starve
EDMUND	Come hither, captain; hark.
		go follow them to prison:
	Does not become a sword: thy great employment

Captain	I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
	[Flourish. Enter ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, another
	That sets us all at odds: I'll not endure it:
	You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.

	Not to be over-ruled. Idle old man,


	till some little time hath qualified the heat of
EDGAR	Some villain hath done me wrong.
	lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to

	and horror of it: pray you, away.

	That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter GONERIL, and OSWALD, her steward]

	But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
KENT	Where learned you this, fool?



GLOUCESTER	Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.

	No, but not yet: may be he is not well:
	And am fall'n out with my more headier will,

	Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,

	To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
KING OF FRANCE	This is most strange,
	So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence
	Could never plant in me.
	I'll do't before I speak,--that you make known
	Improper for a slave.

EDGAR	What means that bloody knife?
ALBANY	Who dead? speak, man.
EDMUND	I was contracted to them both: all three
ALBANY	Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead:

	Which very manners urges.

	[The bodies of GONERIL and REGAN are brought in]
	The one the other poison'd for my sake,
EDMUND	I pant for life: some good I mean to do,



	To lay the blame upon her own despair,
	[EDMUND is borne off]
KING LEAR	Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones:
	If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
EDGAR	Or image of that horror?
	It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
KING LEAR	Prithee, away.
	I might have saved her; now she's gone for ever!

	I would have made them skip: I am old now,
	One of them we behold.
	Your servant Kent: Where is your servant Caius?
KENT	No, my good lord; I am the very man,--
	Have follow'd your sad steps.
	Your eldest daughters have fordone them selves,
ALBANY	He knows not what he says: and vain it is
	[Enter a Captain]
	You lords and noble friends, know our intent.

	Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
	Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
	Look there, look there!

KENT	Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him much

	Is general woe.
	Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
ALBANY	The weight of this sad time we must obey;
	[Exeunt, with a dead march]
BURGUNDY	I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
	I shall not be his wife.
	As we shall find their merits and our safety
	To some retention and appointed guard;
	My reason all the same; and they are ready



KING LEAR	Say, how is that?
	'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
REGAN	                  O, sir, you are old.
	As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
	Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
	And the remainder, that shall still depend,
	Saddle my horses; call my train together:
	Make servants of their betters.

	Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,

	The worships of their name. O most small fault,
	Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in,

	As I am glad I have not, though not to have it

	When it is mingled with regards that stand
	Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
	Let is be so: yet have I left a daughter,
	The knowledge of themselves.




	[Enter CORDELIA, KENT, and Doctor]

CORDELIA	Be better suited:
	Yet to be known shortens my made intent:

Doctor	Madam, sleeps still.
	Of this child-changed father!
CORDELIA	Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed


	Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
CORDELIA	Had you not been their father, these white flakes
	Of quick, cross lightning? to watch--poor perdu!--
	In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!

	Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
KING LEAR	You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?

	I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
	No, sir, you must not kneel.
	And, to deal plainly,
	Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
CORDELIA	And so I am, I am.
	Have, as I do remember, done me wrong:
KING LEAR	Am I in France?

	Till further settling.
	Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.

KENT	As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
KENT	Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the





	Or whether since he is advised by aught

REGAN	Now, sweet lord,
EDMUND	In honour'd love.
EDMUND	That thought abuses you.
EDMUND	No, by mine honour, madam.
EDMUND	Fear me not:
GONERIL	[Aside]  I had rather lose the battle than that sister
	With others whom the rigor of our state
	Lie would not yield to age.
GLOUCESTER	Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone:

	The food of thy abused father's wrath!

	Say you have wrong'd her, sir.


	She hath abated me of half my train;
	You taking airs, with lameness!
	Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
	When the rash mood is on.
	Do comfort and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
	The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
REGAN	Good sir, to the purpose.


KING LEAR	This is a slave, whose easy-borrow'd pride


	[To GONERIL]
GONERIL	Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
	Will you yet hold? How came my man i' the stocks?
KING LEAR	You! did you?
	Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
	No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
	Our youngest born, I could as well be brought

KING LEAR	I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:
	Which I must needs call mine: thou art a boil,
	Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:
REGAN	Not altogether so:
	But she knows what she does.
	Is it not well? What should you need of more?

	We could control them. If you will come to me,--
KING LEAR	I gave you all--
	But kept a reservation to be follow'd

	[To GONERIL]


	Allow not nature more than nature needs,
	You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
	To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
GLOUCESTER	Think you so?
	that without any further delay than this very evening.

	myself, to be in a due resolution.
GLOUCESTER	These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend
	cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in
	child. We have seen the best of our time:
	noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his
EDMUND	This is the excellent foppery of the world, that,
	heavenly compulsion; knaves, thieves, and
	of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish
	lecherous. Tut, I should have been that I am,


	this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
	unhappily; as of unnaturalness between the child
	of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
	Hast practised on man's life: close pent-up guilts,
KENT	Alack, bare-headed!
	Which even but now, demanding after you,
	Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold?
	Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
	He that has and a little tiny wit--
KING LEAR	True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
	I'll speak a prophecy ere I go:
	When every case in law is right;
	And bawds and whores do churches build;
	This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.

ACT III

	dealing. When I desire their leave that I might

	received a letter this night; 'tis dangerous to be
	privily relieve him: go you and maintain talk with
	some strange thing toward, Edmund; pray you, be careful.
	Instantly know; and of that letter too:
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool]

KENT	Good my lord, enter here.

	But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
	Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
	In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
KENT	                  Good my lord, enter here.


	How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
	That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,
	[The Fool runs out from the hovel]
KENT	Give me thy hand. Who's there?
	Come forth.
	Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.

	in his pew; set ratsbane by his porridge; made film
	star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some



KING LEAR	O me, my heart, my rising heart! but, down!
	wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that, in pure
KING LEAR	Good morrow to you both.

	I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
	No, I'll not weep:
	[Exeunt KING LEAR, GLOUCESTER, KENT, and Fool]

	And must needs taste his folly.
GONERIL	So am I purposed.
	[Re-enter GLOUCESTER]

GONERIL	My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

	And what they may incense him to, being apt

	KING LEAR

	[Storm still. Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting]

	Or swell the curled water 'bove the main,
	The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.


	With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
	Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
	Into this scatter'd kingdom; who already,
	To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
	And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer
KENT	No, do not.
	And she will tell you who your fellow is
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KENT and a Gentleman]
Gentleman	Something he left imperfect in the

KENT	Did your letters pierce the queen to any
	Her delicate cheek: it seem'd she was a queen

	That play'd on her ripe lip, seem'd not to know

	Cried 'Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!
	To deal with grief alone.
	Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?

	What we are come about, and by no means
KENT	A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness,
	Detains him from Cordelia.

	Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
	[Exeunt]



	Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
	The untented woundings of a father's curse
EDGAR	[Aside]  And worse I may be yet: the worst is not
GLOUCESTER	Is it a beggar-man?
	I' the last night's storm I such a fellow saw;
	As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods.
	Angering itself and others.--Bless thee, master!

	I' the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;

Old Man	I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
GLOUCESTER	Sirrah, naked fellow,--

EDGAR	[Aside]  And yet I must.--Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
	Tom hath been scared out of his good wits: bless
	mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids
	Makes thee the happier: heavens, deal so still!
	And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
	Looks fearfully in the confined deep:






	He smiled at it: I told him you were coming:
	What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
	That dares not undertake: he'll not feel wrongs
	Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
	[Giving a favour]

	[Exit EDMUND]

	[Enter ALBANY]
	You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
	From her material sap, perforce must wither
ALBANY	Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile:
	Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.
	It will come,
	That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
	France spreads his banners in our noiseless land;
ALBANY	See thyself, devil!

	Thy flesh and bones: howe'er thou art a fiend,
	[Enter a Messenger]
	Slain by his servant, going to put out
Messenger	A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
	Hath pluck'd him after.
	Lost he his other eye?

	The news is not so tart.--I'll read, and answer.

Messenger	No, my good lord; I met him back again.
	And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
	head-piece.
	The man that makes his toe
	mouths in a glass.
	[Enter KENT]
	man and a fool.
	And make them keep their caves: since I was man,

	Unwhipp'd of justice: hide thee, thou bloody hand;
EDMUND	Sir, you speak nobly.
	For these domestic and particular broils

GONERIL	No.


EDGAR	Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
	Your business of the world hath so an end,
EDGAR	I was forbid it.

EDMUND	The enemy's in view; draw up your powers.
ALBANY	We will greet the time.
	Each jealous of the other, as the stung
	And hardly shall I carry out my side,
	Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Alarum within. Enter, with drum and colours,


	[Alarum and retreat within. Re-enter EDGAR]

	Ripeness is all: come on.



	KING LEAR and CORDELIA, prisoners; Captain,
	That are to censure them.
	That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think


	You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
	And such a daughter,
	[Exit]
	Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,

	If she sustain him and his hundred knights
		                  How now, Oswald!
GONERIL	Take you some company, and away to horse:

	Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
	Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.




	know than comes from her demand out of the letter.



	apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
	crab. Thou canst tell why one's nose stands i'
Fool	Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose; that
Fool	Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?


	seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.




KING LEAR	Come, boy.
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter EDMUND, and CURAN meets him]
	given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan
CURAN	Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad;


EDMUND	The duke be here to-night? The better! best!
	Brother, a word; descend: brother, I say!
	Intelligence is given where you are hid;
	Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
EDMUND	I hear my father coming: pardon me:

	[Wounds his arm]

EDMUND	Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,

EDMUND	Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could--

	'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
		    What can man's wisdom
	Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,
CORDELIA	All blest secrets,
	That wants the means to lead it.
	The British powers are marching hitherward.
	Therefore great France




OSWALD	Ay, madam.
	Your sister is the better soldier.

REGAN	'Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
	His nighted life: moreover, to descry
REGAN	Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us;


	She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks
REGAN	I speak in understanding; you are; I know't:
	If you do find him, pray you, give him this;
	Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
REGAN	Fare thee well.

ACT IV


EDGAR	Horrible steep.
	The night before there was no purpose in them
KING LEAR	Ha!
Fool	Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied

	Your son and daughter.

KING LEAR	No, no, they would not.

	To do upon respect such violent outrage:
KENT	                  My lord, when at their home
	From Goneril his mistress salutations;
	The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
	Having more man than wit about me, drew:
Fool	Winter's not gone yet, if the wild-geese fly that way.
	Fortune, that arrant whore,
KING LEAR	O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!




	that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel
	would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
KING LEAR	Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
	Those pelican daughters.
Fool	This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
	array. Tom's a-cold.
	my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of
	wine loved I deeply, dice dearly: and in woman
	silks betray thy poor heart to woman: keep thy foot
	Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let him trot by.
	with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
	unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare,


	the web and the pin, squints the eye, and makes the
	Bid her alight,

GLOUCESTER	What are you there? Your names?
	eats cow-dung for sallets; swallows the old rat and
	body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear;
	[Exit an Attendant]

	that is honest; to converse with him that is wise,


KENT	You.
	which I would fain call master.

	bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am
KENT	Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor
	worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet.

OSWALD	So please you,--

	[Re-enter Knight]


	ceremonious affection as you were wont; there's a
KING LEAR	Ha! sayest thou so?

	I will look further into't. But where's my fool? I


	[Re-enter OSWALD]
OSWALD	My lady's father.
OSWALD	I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.

	[Tripping up his heels]
KENT	Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences:
	[Pushes OSWALD out]
	[Giving KENT money]

Fool	Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
	nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits,
	How now, nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
	myself. There's mine; beg another of thy daughters.
	out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.

	Speak less than thou knowest,
	Leave thy drink and thy whore,
KENT	This is nothing, fool.



	Come place him here by me,
	The other found out there.
	thou wast born with.
	I had a monopoly out, they would have part on't:
KING LEAR	What two crowns shall they be?
	both parts, thou borest thy ass on thy back o'er

	Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:
	That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
	REGAN, and CORDELIA]
	Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are;
	I would prefer him to a better place.
GONERIL	Let your study
CORDELIA	Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides:

	father will hence to-night.
	observation we have made of it hath not been
REGAN	'Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever
	not alone the imperfections of long-engraffed
	him as this of Kent's banishment.
	such dispositions as he bears, this last
GONERIL	We must do something, and i' the heat.

ACT I

	My services are bound. Wherefore should I
	When my dimensions are as well compact,
	More composition and fierce quality
	Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
	Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
	And the king gone to-night! subscribed his power!

EDMUND	I know no news, my lord.





	in the oppression of aged tyranny; who sways, not
	brother,	EDGAR.'
	to breed it in?--When came this to you? who
	casement of my closet.
	it were his; but, in respect of that, I would
EDMUND	It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is
EDMUND	Never, my lord: but I have heard him oft
GLOUCESTER	O villain, villain! His very opinion in the

	course; where, if you violently proceed against
	[Drawing his sword]
	king; and take vanity the puppet's part against the





OSWALD	I am scarce in breath, my lord.





	addition I can: I will not be long from you.
	[Exit GLOUCESTER]


KING LEAR	To have a thousand with red burning spits
Fool	He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a
	[To EDGAR]

	Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me,--



	[To the Fool]
	[To KENT]
EDGAR	Let us deal justly.
	Pur! the cat is gray.

Fool	Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
	False justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?
	That thou so oft have boasted to retain?
KING LEAR	The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and
	Tooth that poisons if it bite;
	For, with throwing thus my head,
KING LEAR	Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds

KENT	Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Fool	And I'll go to bed at noon.

	There is a litter ready; lay him in 't,
	Stand in assured loss: take up, take up;
	This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,


	Who alone suffers suffers most i' the mind,
	When that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
	What will hap more to-night, safe 'scape the king!


SCENE VII	Gloucester's castle.
CORNWALL	Post speedily to my lord your husband; show him

CORNWALL	Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our
	like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent

	Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
CORNWALL	Get horses for your mistress.

GONERIL	That were the most, if he should husband you.
	That eye that told you so look'd but a-squint.
	Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:

ALBANY	Half-blooded fellow, yes.
	On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
	For your claim, fair sister,
	My lady is bespoke.
	If none appear to prove upon thy head

REGAN	Sick, O, sick!

	Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,

	Took their discharge.

	Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound,
	[A trumpet sounds]
	traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the
	[First trumpet]

	[Trumpet answers within]
ALBANY	Ask him his purposes, why he appears
	This present summons?
	I come to cope.

	Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.
	Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor;
	A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou 'No,'
EDMUND	In wisdom I should ask thy name;
	Back do I toss these treasons to thy head;

GONERIL	This is practise, Gloucester:
ALBANY	Shut your mouth, dame,
	[Gives the letter to EDMUND]
ALBANY	Most monstrous! oh!
	[Exit]
	And more, much more; the time will bring it out:
EDGAR	                  Let's exchange charity.
	Make instruments to plague us:
	The wheel is come full circle: I am here.
	Did hate thee or thy father!
	How have you known the miseries of your father?
	That follow'd me so near,--O, our lives' sweetness!
	Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
	Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
	Burst smilingly.

EDGAR	                  This would have seem'd a period
	Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
	Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him

	For wise men are grown foppish,

	[Singing]
	And go the fools among.
KING LEAR	An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipped.
	whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any



	He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
	That's a shealed peascod.
	In rank and not-to-be endured riots. Sir,
	By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
	Will call discreet proceeding.
	So, out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
	I would you would make use of that good wisdom,
Fool	May not an ass know when the cart
	Either his notion weakens, his discernings

Fool	Which they will make an obedient father.
	Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you



CORNWALL	Bind fast his corky arms.
CORNWALL	Bind him, I say.

	[REGAN plucks his beard]
REGAN	So white, and such a traitor!
	With robbers' hands my hospitable favours
REGAN	Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.
REGAN	To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king? Speak.

CORNWALL	Where hast thou sent the king?

REGAN	Wherefore to Dover, sir?
	The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
	Thou shouldst have said 'Good porter, turn the key,'
	Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
REGAN	One side will mock another; the other too.
	I have served you ever since I was a child;


REGAN	Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!
	To see some mischief on him. O!
	Where is thy lustre now?


DUKE OF ALBANY	(ALBANY:)

CURAN	a courtier.

	A Captain employed by Edmund. (Captain:)
	Servants to Cornwall.

CORDELIA	|
	(Knight:)





	of either's moiety.
	so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am
GLOUCESTER	Sir, this young fellow's mother could: whereupon
KENT	I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it
	though this knave came something saucily into the


EDMUND	Sir, I shall study deserving.
	[Sennet. Enter KING LEAR, CORNWALL, ALBANY,
GLOUCESTER	I shall, my liege.
	Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
	And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
	Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
	That we our largest bounty may extend
	Dearer than eye-sight, space, and liberty;
	Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
LEAR	Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
	Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
	I find she names my very deed of love;
	In your dear highness' love.

	Although the last, not least; to whose young love
CORDELIA	Nothing, my lord.

	According to my bond; nor more nor less.
CORDELIA	Good my lord,
	They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,

KING LEAR	So young, and so untender?
	For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
	Propinquity and property of blood,
	Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and relieved,
KING LEAR	Peace, Kent!
	Her father's heart from her! Call France; who stirs?
	Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
	The name, and all the additions to a king;
	[Giving the crown]
	As my great patron thought on in my prayers,--
	The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly,
	And, in thy best consideration, cheque

	Thy safety being the motive.
	The true blank of thine eye.
	Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.


	Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
	Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,
	Five days we do allot thee, for provision
	The moment is thy death. Away! by Jupiter,


	Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
	[Flourish. Re-enter GLOUCESTER, with KING OF FRANCE,
KING LEAR	My lord of Burgundy.

KING LEAR	Right noble Burgundy,
	And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,
KING LEAR	Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
BURGUNDY	Pardon me, royal sir;

	That it doth hate what gets it.
	To obey in all your daughters' hard commands:




	His daughters seek his death: ah, that good Kent!
	But lately, very late: I loved him, friend;
KING LEAR	O, cry your mercy, sir.
GLOUCESTER	In, fellow, there, into the hovel: keep thee warm.


KING LEAR	Come, good Athenian.
	His word was still,--Fie, foh, and fum,


SCENE V	Gloucester's castle.
CORNWALL	I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.


	or not I the detector!
	mighty business in hand.


	Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
	And found--dispatch. The noble duke my master,
	He that conceals him, death.
	'Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,
	My very character,--I'ld turn it all
	To make thee seek it.'
	[Tucket within]
	I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
	[Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, and Attendants]
REGAN	If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
REGAN	What, did my father's godson seek your life?
REGAN	Was he not companion with the riotous knights
EDMUND	Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
	I have this present evening from my sister
CORNWALL	Nor I, assure thee, Regan.


	How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,


EDGAR	Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
	In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
GLOUCESTER	Methinks you're better spoken.
	Show scarce so gross as beetles: half way down
	Diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
	Topple down headlong.
	Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon
	Well worth a poor man's taking: fairies and gods


	To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
	[He falls forward]
	Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought,

	Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg: but thou dost breathe;

	Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.
	When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage,

	Which parted from you?
	Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,

	'The fiend, the fiend:' he led me to that place.

	king himself.
	press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a
	flown, bird! i' the clout, i' the clout: hewgh!
KING LEAR	Pass.
	me like a dog; and told me I had white hairs in my
	the thunder would not peace at my bidding; there I
GLOUCESTER	The trick of that voice I do well remember:
	I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause? Adultery?
	Was kinder to his father than my daughters
	That minces virtue, and does shake the head
	Though women all above:
	Burning, scalding, stench, consumption; fie,
GLOUCESTER	O, let me kiss that hand!
	Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?
	penning of it.
	And my heart breaks at it.

KING LEAR	O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your
GLOUCESTER	I see it feelingly.
	thine ear: change places; and, handy-dandy, which

	Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;
	And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks:
	And like a scurvy politician, seem

	We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.
	To this great stage of fools: this a good block;



	To use his eyes for garden water-pots,
KING LEAR	I will die bravely, like a bridegroom. What!



EDGAR	Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
EDGAR	But, by your favour,


GLOUCESTER	You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me:

	Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
	To boot, and boot!
	That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
GLOUCESTER	Now let thy friendly hand
OSWALD	Wherefore, bold peasant,
EDGAR	Ch'ill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.
	pass. An chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life,


	And give the letters which thou find'st about me

GLOUCESTER	What, is he dead?
	He had no other death's-man. Let us see:
	[Reads]
	There is nothing done, if he return the conqueror:
		'Affectionate servant,
	Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified

	hours at the trade.
	at suit of his gray beard,--
	a jakes with him. Spare my gray beard, you wagtail?
KENT	Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.
	Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
	Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
	Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
GLOUCESTER	How fell you out? say that.
CORNWALL	Why dost thou call him a knave?  What's his offence?


	An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
	That stretch their duties nicely.
	On flickering Phoebus' front,--
	discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no

	To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
	For him attempting who was self-subdued;
	But Ajax is their fool.

	Against the grace and person of my master,



	Will cheque him for 't: your purposed low correction
	Should have him thus restrain'd.
	To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,
	Come, my good lord, away.
	Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
	A good man's fortune may grow out at heels:
	[Exit]
	Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
	Of my obscured course; and shall find time
	Fortune, good night: smile once more: turn thy wheel!

ACT II

	And by the happy hollow of a tree
	To take the basest and most poorest shape
	The winds and persecutions of the sky.
	And with this horrible object, from low farms,




