	By those that feel their sharpness:
	I hold you but a subject of this war,
GONERIL	And let his knights have colder looks among you;




	May carry through itself to that full issue

	When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
KENT	Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet;
	[Exeunt severally]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KING LEAR and Fool]
	You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,
	That make ingrateful man!
	here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.
	I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
	That have with two pernicious daughters join'd
KING LEAR	What, fifty of my followers at a clap!

	Life and death! I am ashamed

	Into her womb convey sterility!
	And be a thwart disnatured torment to her!
	How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
ALBANY	Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
	Bore the commission of my place and person;
	In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
	My love should kindle to inflamed respect.
	Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature,
	That made the overture of thy treasons to us;


	Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:
Second Servant	I'll never care what wickedness I do,
	Women will all turn monsters.





	The lamentable change is from the best;

	Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
	Your needful counsel to our business,




KENT	Ay.

OSWALD	Why, then, I care not for thee.
OSWALD	Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.

	glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue;
	will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deniest


	Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
	And ask of thee forgiveness: so we'll live,
	And take upon's the mystery of things,
EDMUND	Take them away.
	And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;
	[Exeunt KING LEAR and CORDELIA, guarded]
	[Giving a paper]
	To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men

	As I have set it down.
	[Exit]
ALBANY	Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,
	I will not speak with him; say I am sick:

	If he dislike it, let him to our sister,
	Old fools are babes again; and must be used

EDMUND	Parted you in good terms? Found you no
EDMUND	Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended
	would scarcely allay.
	forbearance till the spied of his rage goes

	towards you: I have told you what I have seen

	A credulous father! and a brother noble,
	All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.

ACT I


	Will pack when it begins to rain,
	The fool no knave, perdy.

	The images of revolt and flying off.
	How unremoveable and fix'd he is
	I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

	Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
	When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind

	Is practise only. Give me my servant forth.
KING LEAR	Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,
		     For you, great king,
	Almost to acknowledge hers.
	Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time
	Fall'n into taint: which to believe of her,
	If for I want that glib and oily art,
	That hath deprived me of your grace and favour;

ALBANY	Speak, man.
	It came even from the heart of--O, she's dead!
	By her is poisoned; she hath confess'd it.
EDGAR	Here comes Kent.

		    O, is this he?
	To bid my king and master aye good night:
	See'st thou this object, Kent?

ALBANY	Even so. Cover their faces.
	Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia:
EDGAR	To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send

EDMUND	He hath commission from thy wife and me
ALBANY	The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
	EDGAR, Captain, and others following]
	I know when one is dead, and when one lives;
KENT	Is this the promised end

KENT	[Kneeling]  O my good master!

	Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
KING LEAR	Did I not, fellow?


	He'll strike, and quickly too: he's dead and rotten.


KING LEAR	Ay, so I think.
EDGAR	Very bootless.

	During the life of this old majesty,
		     you, to your rights:

	Pray you, undo this button: thank you, sir.

EDGAR	Look up, my lord.



	My master calls me, I must not say no.
	Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
KING LEAR	Nothing: I have sworn; I am firm.
CORDELIA	Peace be with Burgundy!
	Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised!
	That were the opposites of this day's strife:
EDMUND	Sir, I thought it fit
	An turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
	We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;

	Thy sister's naught: O Regan, she hath tied
	I can scarce speak to thee; thou'lt not believe
	Than she to scant her duty.
	Would fail her obligation: if, sir, perchance
KING LEAR	My curses on her!
	That this our court, infected with their manners,
	By her, that else will take the thing she begs,



		        O, sir, are you come?

	That all particulars of duty know,
	From the fix'd place; drew from heart all love,

KING LEAR	Better thou
	That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,

	So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,





	To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
	Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.


		      How does the king?
	Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
	That we may wake the king: he hath slept long.
Gentleman	Ay, madam; in the heaviness of his sleep

CORDELIA	O my dear father! Restoration hang
KENT	Kind and dear princess!
	To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
	Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,

KING LEAR	You do me wrong to take me out o' the grave:
CORDELIA	Sir, do you know me?

	To see another thus. I know not what to say.
CORDELIA	                  O, look upon me, sir,
	I am a very foolish fond old man,
	Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant
	To be my child Cordelia.
	If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
CORDELIA	No cause, no cause.

	To make him even o'er the time he has lost.


Gentleman	Who is conductor of his people?
	of Kent in Germany.
Gentleman	The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you
KENT	My point and period will be throughly wrought,


SCENE I	The British camp, near Dover.


EDMUND	'Tis to be doubted, madam.
	Do you not love my sister?
	To the forfended place?
	And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.
	Be not familiar with her.
	[Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers]
ALBANY	Our very loving sister, well be-met.
	It toucheth us, as France invades our land,
	your father's tenant, these fourscore years.

	Our means secure us, and our mere defects

	I am worse than e'er I was.
	Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you,
	Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
	Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg

	All the stored vengeances of heaven fall


	Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
	And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
	Wherein I thee endow'd.

REGAN	I know't, my sister's: this approves her letter,
		       Is your lady come?


	Make it your cause; send down, and take my part!
	O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?

	Deserved much less advancement.
	If, till the expiration of your month,

	Necessity's sharp pinch! Return with her?
	Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
GONERIL	At your choice, sir.
	But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
	Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:
	I and my hundred knights.
	For those that mingle reason with your passion

	Should many people, under two commands,

	Will I give place or notice.


	Stands in some rank of praise.
	Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
	To follow in a house where twice so many
KING LEAR	O, reason not the need: our basest beggars
	Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,
	If it be you that stir these daughters' hearts
	I will have such revenges on you both,
	pretence of danger.
	where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an

	out: wind me into him, I pray you: frame the
	business as I shall find means and acquaint you withal.
	scourged by the sequent effects: love cools,
	prediction; there's son against father: the king
	graves. Find out this villain, Edmund; it shall
	[Exit]
	disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars: as
	planetary influence; and all that we are evil in,
	dragon's tail; and my nativity was under Ursa

	sigh like Tom o' Bedlam. O, these eclipses do


	maledictions against king and nobles; needless

	That art incestuous: caitiff, to pieces shake,
	More sinn'd against than sinning.
	Repose you there; while I to this hard house--

	That can make vile things precious. Come,
Fool	[Singing]
	For the rain it raineth every day.

	When nobles are their tailors' tutors;
	Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
	Then comes the time, who lives to see't,




	displeasure, neither to speak of him, entreat for
GLOUCESTER	Go to; say you nothing. There's a division betwixt
	home; there's part of a power already footed: we
	Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,

	The younger rises when the old doth fall.

ACT III

	The tyranny of the open night's too rough
KING LEAR	Let me alone.

	But where the greater malady is fix'd,
	The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind
	No, I will weep no more. In such a night
	No more of that.
	This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
	In, boy; go first. You houseless poverty,--
	Poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are,
	Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;
EDGAR	[Within]  Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!
	Help me, help me!


KING LEAR	Hast thou given all to thy two daughters?
	through ford and whirlipool e'er bog and quagmire;
	traitor. Bless thy five wits! Tom's a-cold,--O, do


	[Exit]
	when she put 'em i' the paste alive; she knapped 'em
	[Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants]

KING LEAR	Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
	What they are, yet I know not: but they shall be
	Or ere I'll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!


	But not one follower.
CORNWALL	Follow'd the old man forth: he is return'd.

CORNWALL	'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
	Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about
	Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors:
CORNWALL	Shut up your doors, my lord; 'tis a wild night:

ACT III


Gentleman	Contending with the fretful element:
	Catch in their fury, and make nothing of;
	Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
Gentleman	None but the fool; who labours to out-jest
	Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
	Which are to France the spies and speculations
	Whereof perchance these are but furnishings;
	To show their open banner. Now to you:
	The king hath cause to plain.
Gentleman	I will talk further with you.
	What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,--

	Tell me what more thou know'st.

ACT IV

	know you the reason?
	fear and danger, that his personal return was
Gentleman	The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
Gentleman	Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence;

	Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
	Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,
Gentleman	'Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of 'father'
	The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
	The stars above us, govern our conditions;

KENT	Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' the town;
Gentleman	Why, good sir?
	To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting

KENT	Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear,
	Along with me.



	Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
	And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
Old Man	'Tis poor mad Tom.
Old Man	Fellow, where goest?

	Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard
EDGAR	[Aside]	How should this be?
GLOUCESTER	Then, prithee, get thee gone: if, for my sake,

	Above the rest, be gone.
	[Exit]

GLOUCESTER	Come hither, fellow.

	Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of
GLOUCESTER	Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues
	Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly;

	With something rich about me: from that place





OSWALD	Madam, within; but never man so changed.
	When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot,
GONERIL	[To EDMUND]  Then shall you go no further.
	Hasten his musters and conduct his powers:
	A mistress's command. Wear this; spare speech;
	Would stretch thy spirits up into the air:
GONERIL	My most dear Gloucester!
	To thee a woman's services are due:
	[Exit]

	Cannot be border'd certain in itself;
GONERIL	No more; the text is foolish.
	A father, and a gracious aged man,
	If that the heavens do not their visible spirits

	Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
	'Alack, why does he so?'

	To let these hands obey my blood,
GONERIL	Marry, your manhood now--

ALBANY	Gloucester's eye!
	Flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
	You justicers, that these our nether crimes
	This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
	May all the building in my fancy pluck

ALBANY	He is not here.

ALBANY	Gloucester, I live
	The head and he shall louse;
	And turn his sleep to wake.
	I will say nothing.

	Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies
	Remember to have heard: man's nature cannot carry
	Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
	Most just and heavy causes make oppose.

ALBANY	Let's then determine
REGAN	Sister, you'll go with us?

EDGAR	If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor,
	[Exeunt all but ALBANY and EDGAR]
	I can produce a champion that will prove
ALBANY	Stay till I have read the letter.

	[Re-enter EDMUND]
	Is now urged on you.

	If both remain alive: to take the widow
	Let her who would be rid of him devise
	Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

ACT V


	If ever I return to you again,
	[Exit EDGAR]
	King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en:
EDGAR	What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure




EDMUND	Some officers take them away: good guard,

ALBANY	I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
	[To the Fool]
	with thee.
	So the fool follows after.
	'Tis politic and safe to let him keep

	Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.
	[Re-enter OSWALD]
OSWALD	Yes, madam.
	As may compact it more. Get you gone;
		  No, no, my lord,




SCENE V	Court before the same.
KING LEAR	Go you before to Gloucester with these letters.
KENT	I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered
Fool	If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in
Fool	Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall ne'er go
Fool	Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly;

KING LEAR	No.
KING LEAR	I did her wrong--

Fool	Why, to put his head in; not to give it away to his


Fool	If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten
Fool	Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst

Gentleman	Ready, my lord.
	Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.

ACT II


EDMUND	How comes that?


	[Exit]
	And I have one thing, of a queasy question,

	He's coming hither: now, i' the night, i' the haste,
EDGAR	                  I am sure on't, not a word.
	Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!
	Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.
	Do more than this in sport. Father, father!
GLOUCESTER	Now, Edmund, where's the villain?

GLOUCESTER	Where is the villain, Edmund?

EDMUND	Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;
	Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
	[Exit an Officer]

	Will close the eye of anguish.
	In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him;

	In expectation of them. O dear father,
	But love, dear love, and our aged father's right:


SCENE V	Gloucester's castle.
REGAN	But are my brother's powers set forth?


OSWALD	I know not, lady.
	All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone,
OSWALD	I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
OSWALD	I may not, madam:
	Something--I know not what: I'll love thee much,
REGAN	I know your lady does not love her husband;
OSWALD	I, madam?
	And more convenient is he for my hand
	So, fare you well.
	What party I do follow.




GLOUCESTER	Methinks the ground is even.

KENT	                  Hail to thee, noble master!
KENT	No, my lord.
	over-lusty at legs, then he wears wooden


KENT	I say, yea.

KING LEAR	They durst not do 't;
	Coming from us.
	My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
	They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse;
	Being the very fellow that of late
	The shame which here it suffers.
	But fathers that bear bags
	for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.


KENT	None.

	their noses are led by their eyes but blind men; and
	hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man
KENT	He hath no daughters, sir.
	Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
	Halloo, halloo, loo, loo!
	keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with

	broke them in the sweet face of heaven: one that
	wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
	Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind:

	no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! here's three on

	like an old lecher's heart; a small spark, all the
EDGAR	This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins
	S. Withold footed thrice the old;

KENT	Who's there? What is't you seek?
	the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in
	tithing, and stock- punished, and imprisoned; who
KING LEAR	Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready.

KENT	I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve

KING LEAR	If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a
KING LEAR	Who wouldst thou serve?


KENT	I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious
KING LEAR	How old art thou?


	You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?

	Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's asleep.

Knight	Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would
Knight	My lord, I know not what the matter is; but, to my
	your daughter.
	for my duty cannot be silent when I think your
	have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity
Knight	Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the

	[Exit an Attendant]
	sir?
	whoreson dog! you slave! you cur!

KENT	Nor tripped neither, you base football player.
	love thee.
	wisdom? so.
	earnest of thy service.

KING LEAR	How now, my pretty knave! how dost thou?

	and did the third a blessing against his will; if



Fool	Mark it, nuncle:
	Learn more than thou trowest,
	Than two tens to a score.
	gave me nothing for't. Can you make no use of
Fool	[To KENT]  Prithee, tell him, so much the rent of
Fool	Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a
Fool	That lord that counsell'd thee
	Will presently appear;


	nuncle, and I'll give thee two crowns.
	up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou
	like myself in this, let him be whipped that first
	Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy
KING LEAR	Thou hast her, France: let her be thine; for we


	To your professed bosoms I commit him
REGAN	Prescribe not us our duties.
	And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

GONERIL	Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what

	appears too grossly.
GONERIL	The best and soundest of his time hath been but

	between France and him. Pray you, let's hit
REGAN	We shall further think on't.




	For that I am some twelve or fourteen moon-shines
	With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
	Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well, then,
	And my invention thrive, Edmund the base


GLOUCESTER	Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?

	not such need to hide itself. Let's see: come,
	and for so much as I have perused, I find it not
EDMUND	I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The
EDMUND	I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote
	our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish
	would sleep till I waked him, you should half his
	should enjoy half his revenue,'--My son Edgar!
EDMUND	It was not brought me, my lord; there's the

GLOUCESTER	It is his.
GLOUCESTER	Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business?
	ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
	seek him; I'll apprehend him: abominable villain!
	brother till you can derive from him better
	heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
	draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw.



	[Enter EDMUND, with his rapier drawn, CORNWALL,
KENT	With you, goodman boy, an you please: come, I'll
CORNWALL	Keep peace, upon your lives:
CORNWALL	What is your difference? speak.
	cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a
KENT	Ay, a tailor, sir: a stone-cutter or painter could


SCENE VI	A chamber in a farmhouse adjoining the castle.
GLOUCESTER	Here is better than the open air; take it
	impatience: the gods reward your kindness!
	Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.

	before him.
EDGAR	The foul fiend bites my back.
KING LEAR	It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.

EDGAR	   Look, where he stands and glares!
	And she must not speak
	white herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no

	Thou robed man of justice, take thy place;
	Bench by his side:
	Sit you too.
	And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,
	oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the
KING LEAR	She cannot deny it.
	What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!

	They'll mar my counterfeiting.
EDGAR	Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
	Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,
	fairs and market-towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.

	say they are Persian attire: but let them be changed.
	so, so, so. We'll go to supper i' he morning. So, so, so.

GLOUCESTER	Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms;
	If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,



EDGAR	When we our betters see bearing our woes,
	When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
	When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, and Servants]

GONERIL	Pluck out his eyes.
	beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to

OSWALD	My lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence:
	To have well-armed friends.

	By me invested, he compeers the best.

	From a full-flowing stomach. General,

EDMUND	Nor in thine, lord.

	[Pointing to Goneril]
	And I, her husband, contradict your bans.


	Than I have here proclaim'd thee.

		what in the world he is

ALBANY	Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,

	[Enter a Herald]
Captain	Sound, trumpet!
	the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund,
EDMUND	Sound!

	[Third trumpet]
	trumpet before him]
Herald	What are you?
	By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit:

EDGAR	Draw thy sword,
	Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
	And, from the extremest upward of thy head
	Thou liest.
	What safe and nicely I might well delay
	This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
ALBANY	Save him, save him!
	But cozen'd and beguiled.
	No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.
	Who can arraign me for't.
GONERIL	Ask me not what I know.

	I do forgive thee.
	My name is Edgar, and thy father's son.

	A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:

	And when 'tis told, O, that my heart would burst!
	Into a madman's rags; to assume a semblance
	Never,--O fault!--reveal'd myself unto him,
	Alack, too weak the conflict to support!
	And shall perchance do good: but speak you on;
	Hearing of this.
	And top extremity.
	He fastened on my neck, and bellow'd out
	Began to crack: twice then the trumpets sounded,
EDGAR	Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise


	the rod, and put'st down thine own breeches,
	And I for sorrow sung,
	thy fool to lie: I would fain learn to lie.
	they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt
	and left nothing i' the middle: here comes one o'
KING LEAR	How now, daughter! what makes that frontlet on?
	figure: I am better than thou art now; I am a fool,
	Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue; so your face
	[Pointing to KING LEAR]
	But other of your insolent retinue
	By what yourself too late have spoke and done.
	Might in their working do you that offence,
	The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,

	From what you rightly are.
KING LEAR	Doth any here know me? This is not Lear:

	I should be false persuaded I had daughters.


	Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
REGAN	Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
	You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.

CORNWALL	To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find--
	To pluck me by the beard.
	These hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,
CORNWALL	Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
	Late footed in the kingdom?
	Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
REGAN	And false.

GLOUCESTER	I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
	Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
	Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.

	Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods!



First Servant	Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.




DUKE OF CORNWALL	(CORNWALL:)

EDMUND	bastard son to Gloucester.

OSWALD	steward to Goneril.
	A Herald.
	(Third Servant:)
REGAN	|  daughters to Lear.
	Knights of Lear's train, Captains, Messengers,



SCENE I	King Lear's palace.
KENT	I thought the king had more affected the Duke of
	the dukes he values most; for equalities are so

KENT	I cannot conceive you.
	Do you smell a fault?
GLOUCESTER	But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year
	whoreson must be acknowledged. Do you know this
GLOUCESTER	My lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my
KENT	I must love you, and sue to know you better.
	again. The king is coming.
KING LEAR	Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.

	Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
	May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
	Interest of territory, cares of state,--

	As much as child e'er loved, or father found;
	Love, and be silent.
	We make thee lady: to thine and Albany's issue
	Of the self-same metal that my sister is,
	Which the most precious square of sense possesses;
	And yet not so; since, I am sure, my love's
	No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
	A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.

CORDELIA	Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
	Lest it may mar your fortunes.
	Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
	Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters,
CORDELIA	Ay, good my lord.

	From whom we do exist, and cease to be;
	Or he that makes his generation messes
KENT	Good my liege,--
	On her kind nursery. Hence, and avoid my sight!
	Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
	By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
	This coronet part betwixt you.
	Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,

	When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound,
	Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
KENT	My life I never held but as a pawn



	|  Dear sir, forbear.
	Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
KING LEAR	Hear me, recreant!
	Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
	Upon our kingdom: if, on the tenth day following,
KENT	Fare thee well, king: sith thus thou wilt appear,
	The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
	And your large speeches may your deeds approve,
	[Exit]
GLOUCESTER	Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
	Will you require in present dower with her,
	Nor will you tender less.
	If aught within that little seeming substance,
BURGUNDY	I know no answer.
	Take her, or leave her?



	Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,


KENT	Importune him once more to go, my lord;
	[Storm still]
	I am almost mad myself: I had a son,
	I do beseech your grace,--
EDGAR	Tom's a-cold.


KENT	Sirrah, come on; go along with us.

	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter CORNWALL and EDMUND]
	gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think
	but a provoking merit, set a-work by a reprovable
	approves him an intelligent party to the advantages

	Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
	my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
	But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
GLOUCESTER	Let him fly far:
	That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
	And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
	Make thy words faith'd? No: what I should deny,--
	If they not thought the profits of my death
	Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
	All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not 'scape;
	To make thee capable.
	Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
GLOUCESTER	O, madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
GLOUCESTER	O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
GLOUCESTER	I know not, madam: 'tis too bad, too bad.
	'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
	I'll not be there.


CORNWALL	If he be taken, he shall never more
	Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;

GLOUCESTER	No, truly.
GLOUCESTER	So may it be, indeed:
	But in my garments.
	And dizzy 'tis, to cast one's eyes so low!
	The fishermen, that walk upon the beach,
	Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more;

GLOUCESTER	Let go my hand.

EDGAR	Why I do trifle thus with his despair
	Shake patiently my great affliction off:
	Now, fellow, fare thee well.
	And yet I know not how conceit may rob
	Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.
EDGAR	Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
	Which thou hast perpendicularly fell:
EDGAR	From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
	Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,
EDGAR	Give me your arm:
EDGAR	This is above all strangeness.

	Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
	'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,



	cheese will do 't. There's my gauntlet; I'll prove
EDGAR	Sweet marjoram.

	too was no good divinity. When the rain came to
	thing; 'tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.
KING LEAR	Ay, every inch a king:
	Does lecher in my sight.
	Behold yond simpering dame,
	With a more riotous appetite.
	There's hell, there's darkness, there's the
	there's money for thee.

	at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! I'll not

GLOUCESTER	What, with the case of eyes?
	this world goes.
	with no eyes. Look with thine ears: see how yond

	dog's obeyed in office.
	Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear;
	Take that of me, my friend, who have the power

	Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:

	And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,
Gentleman	O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,
	You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
KING LEAR	No seconds? all myself?
Gentleman	Good sir,--


	Who redeems nature from the general curse
Gentleman	                  Sir, speed you: what's your will?
	Which can distinguish sound.
Gentleman	Near and on speedy foot; the main descry
Gentleman	Though that the queen on special cause is here,
	[Exit Gentleman]

EDGAR	A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows;
GLOUCESTER	Hearty thanks:

	That must destroy thee.
	[EDGAR interposes]
	Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.

	ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be
EDGAR	Ch'ill pick your teeth, zir: come; no matter vor
OSWALD	Slave, thou hast slain me: villain, take my purse:

	As badness would desire.
	Let's see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of
	Their papers, is more lawful.
	many opportunities to cut him off: if your will
	the place for your labour.
	A plot upon her virtuous husband's life;
	Of the death practised duke: for him 'tis well

	lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this
	You beastly knave, know you no reverence?

	That in the natures of their lords rebel;
	A plague upon your epileptic visage!
CORNWALL	Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
	Than I and such a knave.

	Than stands on any shoulder that I see
	A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
	Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
	Under the allowance of your great aspect,

	I will not be, though I should win your displeasure
OSWALD	I never gave him any:
	And put upon him such a deal of man,

	You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,
	On whose employment I was sent to you:
CORNWALL	Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
KENT	Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
CORNWALL	This is a fellow of the self-same colour
GLOUCESTER	Let me beseech your grace not to do so:
	Are punish'd with: the king must take it ill,

	[KENT is put in the stocks]

KENT	Pray, do not, sir: I have watched and travell'd hard;
GLOUCESTER	The duke's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
	Thou out of heaven's benediction comest
	But misery: I know 'tis from Cordelia,
	Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold




	Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may 'scape,
	Blanket my loins: elf all my hair in knots;
	Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
	Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!


SCENE IV	Before GLOUCESTER's castle. KENT in the stocks.
KING LEAR	'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
