
	Remember to have heard: man's nature cannot carry
	That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads,
	Thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue
	badness in himself.
	approves him an intelligent party to the advantages
CORNWALL	o with me to the duchess.


	between that and my blood.
	The king hath cause to plain.

	For confirmation that I am much more
	And she will tell you who your fellow is
Gentleman	Give me your hand: have you no more to say?
	That way, I'll this,--he that first lights on him

	KING LEAR


KING LEAR	Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!
	Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
	That make ingrateful man!
	Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters' blessing:
	Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters:
Captain	Edmund is dead, my lord.
	What comfort to this great decay may come

	With boot, and such addition as your honours

	Never, never, never, never, never!




	He but usurp'd his life.

	Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.

	Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
	That this our court, infected with their manners,
	For instant remedy: be then desired
	To be such men as may besort your age,
	Saddle my horses; call my train together:
GONERIL	You strike my people; and your disorder'd rabble


	More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child

	And in the most exact regard support
	From the fix'd place; drew from heart all love,
	[Striking his head]
ALBANY	My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
	And leave thee in the storm,
	The fool no knave, perdy.
Fool	Not i' the stocks, fool.
KING LEAR	Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?

	In his own course.
	I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
KING LEAR	Inform'd them! Dost thou understand me, man?
KING LEAR	The king would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
	No, but not yet: may be he is not well:
	To suffer with the body: I'll forbear;

	That this remotion of the duke and her
	Or at their chamber-door I'll beat the drum


	wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that, in pure



	Sepulchring an adultress.
		    O, are you free?

	With how depraved a quality--O Regan!
	Than she to scant her duty.
REGAN	I cannot think my sister in the least
	As clears her from all blame.
REGAN	                  O, sir, you are old.
	then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal; from
		'Affectionate servant,
	And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,
	Of the death practised duke: for him 'tis well

	For which I razed my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
GLOUCESTER	I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
	The food of thy abused father's wrath!
Old Man	How now! Who's there?
	I am worse than e'er I was.
EDGAR	[Aside]  And worse I may be yet: the worst is not

	I will keep still with my philosopher.
GLOUCESTER	Take him you on.
KING LEAR	Come, good Athenian.
EDGAR	      Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
	[Exeunt]

ACT III
SCENE V	Gloucester's castle.

	gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think
	brother's evil disposition made him seek his death;
	Hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear!
	Dry up in her the organs of increase;
	And be a thwart disnatured torment to her!
	To laughter and contempt; that she may feel
	[Exit]
GONERIL	Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
	[Re-enter KING LEAR]

KING LEAR	I'll tell thee:
	Life and death! I am ashamed
	The untented woundings of a father's curse
	To temper clay. Yea, it is come to this?
	She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
	By some discretion, that discerns your state


	That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'

	Most serpent-like, upon the very heart:

	Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
REGAN	O the blest gods! so will you wish on me,
	Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
	To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
	Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;
REGAN	Good sir, to the purpose.
	[Tucket within]
REGAN	I know't, my sister's: this approves her letter,

	Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.

	[Enter GONERIL]
	Make it your cause; send down, and take my part!
	Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
	All's not offence that indiscretion finds
	Will you yet hold? How came my man i' the stocks?

	If, till the expiration of your month,
	Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
	To wage against the enmity o' the air;
	Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
	To this detested groom.
GONERIL	At your choice, sir.
	We'll no more meet, no more see one another:
	A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle,
	Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:

	For those that mingle reason with your passion
KING LEAR	Is this well spoken?
	Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger

REGAN	Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,
	Will I give place or notice.
REGAN	                  And in good time you gave it.
	With such a number. What, must I come to you


	Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
	What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
REGAN	What need one?
	Allow not nature more than nature needs,
	Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need,--
	If it be you that stir these daughters' hearts
	Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,


	Are many simples operative, whose power
	All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
	That wants the means to lead it.
Messenger	News, madam;
	In expectation of them. O dear father,
	No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
	[Exeunt]

ACT IV
SCENE V	Gloucester's castle.


	Your sister is the better soldier.
OSWALD	No, madam.
OSWALD	I know not, lady.
	To let him live: where he arrives he moves
OSWALD	I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.

REGAN	Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you

	I am sure of that: and at her late being here
OSWALD	I, madam?
	My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd;

	What grows of it, no matter; advise your fellows so:




	[Enter KENT, disguised]
	That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
	The knowledge of themselves.
	[Drum afar off]





	To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
	All my reports go with the modest truth;
	These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
	Yet to be known shortens my made intent:
CORDELIA	Then be't so, my good lord.
		      How does the king?
CORDELIA	O you kind gods,

CORDELIA	Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed
	We put fresh garments on him.


	Have in thy reverence made!
CORDELIA	Had you not been their father, these white flakes
	In the most terrible and nimble stroke
	Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
	Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.
CORDELIA	How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?
	Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears


	I am mightily abused. I should e'en die with pity,
	Of my condition!
	No, sir, you must not kneel.
	Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
	Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant
	For, as I am a man, I think this lady

	Have, as I do remember, done me wrong:


	You see, is kill'd in him: and yet it is danger

	Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.
Gentleman	Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
Gentleman	Who is conductor of his people?
Gentleman	They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl
	powers of the kingdom approach apace.

	Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.




EDMUND	Know of the duke if his last purpose hold,


	You know the goodness I intend upon you:
EDMUND	In honour'd love.

	And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.
REGAN	I never shall endure her: dear my lord,
	She and the duke her husband!
GONERIL	[Aside]  I had rather lose the battle than that sister
	Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,
	It toucheth us, as France invades our land,
	I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
	But yet I call you servile ministers,

	Before the head has any,
	What he his heart should make
	mouths in a glass.


KENT	Alas, sir, are you here? things that love night
	Rive your concealing continents, and cry
KENT	Alack, bare-headed!
	More harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised;

	The art of our necessities is strange,
	That's sorry yet for thee.
	He that has and a little tiny wit--


	When brewers mar their malt with water;
	No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
	And bawds and whores do churches build;
	That going shall be used with feet.

	KING LEAR


GLOUCESTER	Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural
	displeasure, neither to speak of him, entreat for

	spoken; I have locked the letter in my closet:
	privily relieve him: go you and maintain talk with
	the king my old master must be relieved. There is

	That which my father loses; no less than all:

	KING LEAR


KENT	Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:
	[Storm still]
KENT	Good my lord, enter here.
KENT	I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
	But where the greater malady is fix'd,
	mind's free,
	Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
	In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!

	This tempest will not give me leave to ponder

	[Fool goes in]
	How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
	Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
EDGAR	[Within]  Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!
Fool	Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit

	Come forth.
EDGAR	Away! the foul fiend follows me!
KING LEAR	Hast thou given all to thy two daughters?
	fiend hath led through fire and through flame, and
	proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting-horse over
	star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some
	[Storm still]

	Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
KING LEAR	Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
	Judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot
	Halloo, halloo, loo, loo!
EDGAR	Take heed o' the foul fiend: obey thy parents;

	my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of
	slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it:
	wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
	from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.

	with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
	's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself:

	to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, with a torch]
	the web and the pin, squints the eye, and makes the
	He met the night-mare, and her nine-fold;



	eats cow-dung for sallets; swallows the old rat and
	hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his
	Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!
EDGAR	The prince of darkness is a gentleman:
	That it doth hate what gets it.
GLOUCESTER	Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer
	Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
	What is the cause of thunder?
KING LEAR	I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.

	His wits begin to unsettle.
	[Storm still]
	Thou say'st the king grows mad; I'll tell thee, friend,
	No father his son dearer: truth to tell thee,
KING LEAR	O, cry your mercy, sir.



	this world goes.
KING LEAR	What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes
	is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen

	Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
	Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear;
	None does offend, none, I say, none; I'll able 'em:
	To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:

	Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air,

	A troop of horse with felt: I'll put 't in proof;
	[Enter a Gentleman, with Attendants]

	I am cut to the brains.
KING LEAR	No seconds? all myself?

	I will be jovial: come, come; I am a king,

	[Exit running; Attendants follow]
	Who redeems nature from the general curse


EDGAR	But, by your favour,
	And shall perchance do good: but speak you on;
	For I am almost ready to dissolve,
	To such as love not sorrow; but another,
	Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
	As he'ld burst heaven; threw him on my father;
	Began to crack: twice then the trumpets sounded,




	It came even from the heart of--O, she's dead!
Gentleman	Your lady, sir, your lady: and her sister
	Now marry in an instant.
ALBANY	Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead:
	[Exit Gentleman]
		    O, is this he?
KENT	I am come
ALBANY	                  Great thing of us forgot!
	[The bodies of GONERIL and REGAN are brought in]
EDMUND	                  Yet Edmund was beloved:
ALBANY	Even so. Cover their faces.
	Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ
ALBANY	                  Run, run, O, run!

ALBANY	Haste thee, for thy life.
EDMUND	He hath commission from thy wife and me


KING LEAR	Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones:
	She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass;
CORDELIA	We are not the first
	Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
	When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down,
	Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too,
	In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones,

	And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;

	Take thou this note;
		go follow them to prison:
	Are as the time is: to be tender-minded

	Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so
	If it be man's work, I'll do 't.
	[Flourish. Enter ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, another
	And fortune led you well: you have the captives
	May equally determine.
	To some retention and appointed guard;
	Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;
	We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
	Requires a fitter place.
	Not as a brother.
	Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers;

	And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
	Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.


	KING LEAR


GLOUCESTER	When shall we come to the top of that same hill?
GLOUCESTER	Methinks the ground is even.
EDMUND	Sir, you speak nobly.
GONERIL	Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
ALBANY	Let's then determine



	Hear me one word.
	[Exeunt all but ALBANY and EDGAR]
	For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,
	And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
EDGAR	I was forbid it.
ALBANY	Why, fare thee well: I will o'erlook thy paper.
	[Re-enter EDMUND]
	By diligent discovery; but your haste

	Each jealous of the other, as the stung
	Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
	Let her who would be rid of him devise
	Shall never see his pardon; for my state

	KING LEAR


	and exeunt]
EDGAR	Here, father, take the shadow of this tree


	King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en:



	KING LEAR


	Soldiers, &c]
	That are to censure them.
	That sets us all at odds: I'll not endure it:
	If you come slack of former services,

	You and your fellows; I'll have it come to question:
	That still would manage those authorities
	Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.
KING LEAR	Thou hast her, France: let her be thine; for we
	Come, noble Burgundy.

	Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are;
	But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
REGAN	Prescribe not us our duties.
	At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
	Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.

	most nearly appertains to us both. I think our

	with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off
	but slenderly known himself.
	not alone the imperfections of long-engraffed
REGAN	Such unconstant starts are we like to have from
	between France and him. Pray you, let's hit





	[Enter EDMUND, with a letter]
	Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
	When my dimensions are as well compact,
	Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
	Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well, then,
	Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,

	And the king gone to-night! subscribed his power!
EDMUND	So please your lordship, none.
GLOUCESTER	Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
GLOUCESTER	What paper were you reading?
GLOUCESTER	No? What needed, then, that terrible dispatch of

	fit for your o'er-looking.
EDMUND	I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The

GLOUCESTER	[Reads]  'This policy and reverence of age makes
	in the oppression of aged tyranny; who sways, not
	revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your
	should enjoy half his revenue,'--My son Edgar!


	it were his; but, in respect of that, I would

GLOUCESTER	Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business?
	and fathers declining, the father should be as
	letter! Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested,

	testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain
	heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
	What they are, yet I know not: but they shall be
	Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,


GONERIL	'Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest,
	But not one follower.




	Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about
	The injuries that they themselves procure
	To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.


ACT III
SCENE I	A heath.


	Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea,
	Catch in their fury, and make nothing of;
	The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
KENT	But who is with him?

	Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
	Which are to France the spies and speculations
	Against the old kind king; or something deeper,
	Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
	To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
	But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,

	My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night:
	He that conceals him, death.
	I threaten'd to discover him: he replied,
	Make thy words faith'd? No: what I should deny,--
	And thou must make a dullard of the world,

	[Tucket within]
	The duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
	To make thee capable.
CORNWALL	How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,
	Which can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord?
REGAN	What, did my father's godson seek your life?

GLOUCESTER	I know not, madam: 'tis too bad, too bad.
REGAN	No marvel, then, though he were ill affected:
	Been well inform'd of them; and with such cautions,
CORNWALL	Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
EDMUND	'Twas my duty, sir.


	Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant

GLOUCESTER	For him I thank your grace.
REGAN	Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:
	Of differences, which I least thought it fit
	Your needful counsel to our business,
	Your graces are right welcome.








OSWALD	Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
OSWALD	What dost thou know me for?
	hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a
	bawd, in way of good service, and art nothing but
	the least syllable of thy addition.

	rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon
	[Drawing his sword]
KENT	Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the

	slave, strike.
OSWALD	Help, ho! murder! murder!

	flesh ye; come on, young master.
CORNWALL	Keep peace, upon your lives:



	not have made him so ill, though he had been but two
	And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:

	KING LEAR


KENT	Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back
	state, which since his coming forth is thought


Gentleman	Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence;
	Sought to be king o'er her.
Gentleman	Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove
	That play'd on her ripe lip, seem'd not to know
	If all could so become it.
Gentleman	'Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of 'father'
	Let pity not be believed!' There she shook

	Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
KENT	Was this before the king return'd?
KENT	Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' the town;

	That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
	Detains him from Cordelia.
KENT	Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
KENT	Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear,
	Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go




	As mad as the vex'd sea; singing aloud;
	In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;

GONERIL	That were the most, if he should husband you.
GONERIL	Holla, holla!
	From a full-flowing stomach. General,
	My lord and master.
ALBANY	The let-alone lies not in your good will.
ALBANY	Half-blooded fellow, yes.
ALBANY	Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
	[Pointing to Goneril]
	'Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,

	If none appear to prove upon thy head
	[Throwing down a glove]
	Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
GONERIL	[Aside]  If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.
	[Throwing down a glove]
	Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,
ALBANY	A herald, ho!
ALBANY	Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
REGAN	My sickness grows upon me.
	[Exit Regan, led]
	Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound,

	the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund,




	trumpet before him]


	I come to cope.
EDGAR	What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
EDGAR	Draw thy sword,
	My oath, and my profession: I protest,
	False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
	A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou 'No,'

	What safe and nicely I might well delay
	Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
	[Alarums. They fight. EDMUND falls]
GONERIL	This is practise, Gloucester:

	No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.
GONERIL	Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:
	Know'st thou this paper?
	[Exit]
EDMUND	What you have charged me with, that have I done;
	I do forgive thee.
	If more, the more thou hast wrong'd me.
	The dark and vicious place where thee he got
	The wheel is come full circle: I am here.
	Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I

EDGAR	By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
	That we the pain of death would hourly die
	Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
	Until some half-hour past, when I was arm'd:
	Alack, too weak the conflict to support!
	Stands on the hourly thought.
Gentleman	Though that the queen on special cause is here,

	Let not my worser spirit tempt me again

	Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
GLOUCESTER	Hearty thanks:
	[Enter OSWALD]
	To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
GLOUCESTER	Now let thy friendly hand

	Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
OSWALD	Let go, slave, or thou diest!
	'twould not ha' bin zo long as 'tis by a vortnight.

KENT	Is this the promised end
ALBANY	Fall, and cease!
	That ever I have felt.
KING LEAR	Prithee, away.
KING LEAR	A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
	Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.

	And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
	One of them we behold.
KENT	The same,
	He'll strike, and quickly too: he's dead and rotten.
KING LEAR	I'll see that straight.

	Your eldest daughters have fordone them selves,

EDGAR	Very bootless.
	[Exit an Attendant]
KENT	A man, sir.
KENT	I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve
	cannot choose; and to eat no fish.
KENT	A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.



KING LEAR	What's that?
KING LEAR	What services canst thou do?
	bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am


	Go you, and call my fool hither.
	[Enter OSWALD]
OSWALD	So please you,--
KING LEAR	What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.
	Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's asleep.
	How now! where's that mongrel?
KING LEAR	Why came not the slave back to me when I called him.

	judgment, your highness is not entertained with that
	your daughter.
Knight	I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken;
KING LEAR	Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception: I
	I will look further into't. But where's my fool? I
	fool hath much pined away.



OSWALD	My lady's father.




KENT	Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences:

	earnest of thy service.
	[Enter Fool]
	[Offering KENT his cap]
Fool	Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
Fool	Why, for taking one's part that's out of favour:
	and did the third a blessing against his will; if
KING LEAR	Why, my boy?

	out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.
Fool	Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
Fool	Mark it, nuncle:
	Ride more than thou goest,
	And keep in-a-door,
KENT	This is nothing, fool.
	nothing, nuncle?
Fool	[To KENT]  Prithee, tell him, so much the rent of

KING LEAR	No, lad; teach me.
	Come place him here by me,
	The one in motley here,

KENT	This is not altogether fool, my lord.
	and ladies too, they will not let me have all fool
KING LEAR	What two crowns shall they be?
	clovest thy crown i' the middle, and gavest away
	like myself in this, let him be whipped that first

	If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;

	As duteous to the vices of thy mistress

	He had no other death's-man. Let us see:

	For wise men are grown foppish,
KING LEAR	When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
	the rod, and put'st down thine own breeches,
	Then they for sudden joy did weep,

KING LEAR	An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipped.
	have me whipped for lying; and sometimes I am
	and left nothing i' the middle: here comes one o'

Fool	Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to

	bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum,
	[Pointing to KING LEAR]
GONERIL	Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,
	I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
	By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
	Which else were shame, that then necessity
	The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,
KING LEAR	Are you our daughter?
	Whereof I know you are fraught; and put away
Fool	May not an ass know when the cart
	Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?

	marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason,

	Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you


	displeasure in him by word or countenance?
EDMUND	Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended
	in him, that with the mischief of your person it

	lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to
EDGAR	Armed, brother!
	towards you: I have told you what I have seen
EDGAR	Shall I hear from you anon?
	[Exit EDGAR]
	That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty




	[Enter GONERIL, and OSWALD, her steward]
OSWALD	Yes, madam.



	[Exeunt severally]

ACT IV
SCENE I	The heath.

	Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
	The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst


GLOUCESTER	Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone:
Old Man	Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.

	where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an
GLOUCESTER	He cannot be such a monster--
GLOUCESTER	To his father, that so tenderly and entirely
	myself, to be in a due resolution.

	scourged by the sequent effects: love cools,
	and father. This villain of mine comes under the
	machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
	noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his

	disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars: as
	liars, and adulterers, by an enforced obedience of
	disposition to the charge of a star! My
	lecherous. Tut, I should have been that I am,
	[Enter EDGAR]
	sigh like Tom o' Bedlam. O, these eclipses do
	contemplation are you in?

	unhappily; as of unnaturalness between the child
	diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation


LEAR	king of Britain  (KING LEAR:)
DUKE OF BURGUNDY	(BURGUNDY:)
DUKE OF ALBANY	(ALBANY:)
EARL OF GLOUCESTER	(GLOUCESTER:)
EDMUND	bastard son to Gloucester.
Old Man	tenant to Gloucester.
Fool:
	A Captain employed by Edmund. (Captain:)

	(Third Servant:)
	|

	(Knight:)





	Albany than Cornwall.
	the dukes he values most; for equalities are so
KENT	Is not this your son, my lord?
	brazed to it.
GLOUCESTER	Sir, this young fellow's mother could: whereupon

GLOUCESTER	But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year
	fair; there was good sport at his making, and the
EDMUND	No, my lord.


	again. The king is coming.


	Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
	Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
	May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
	Since now we will divest us both of rule,
	Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
	Dearer than eye-sight, space, and liberty;
	A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable;
	Love, and be silent.
	With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,

	I find she names my very deed of love;
	And find I am alone felicitate
	And yet not so; since, I am sure, my love's
	Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom;
	The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
CORDELIA	Nothing, my lord.
CORDELIA	Nothing.
CORDELIA	Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
KING LEAR	How, how, Cordelia! mend your speech a little,
	You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I
	They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
	To love my father all.
CORDELIA	Ay, good my lord.
CORDELIA	So young, my lord, and true.
	The mysteries of Hecate, and the night;
	Propinquity and property of blood,
	To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
KENT	Good my liege,--
	I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
	Call Burgundy. Cornwall and Albany,
	Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
	That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
	[Exeunt KING LEAR, KENT, and Attendants]
ALBANY	I cannot be so partial, Goneril,


	And such a daughter,

	'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
	And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say!
GONERIL	Safer than trust too far:
	If she sustain him and his hundred knights

OSWALD	Yes, madam.
	And thereto add such reasons of your own
	[Exit OSWALD]
	Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
ALBANY	How far your eyes may pierce I can not tell:


	KING LEAR


KING LEAR	Go you before to Gloucester with these letters.

	[Exit]

	slip-shod.
Fool	Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly;
KING LEAR	Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?
	the middle on's face?
Fool	Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose; that



KING LEAR	I will forget my nature. So kind a father! Be my
	seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
Fool	Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.
Fool	If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten

KING LEAR	O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven


	Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.






	I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but

EDMUND	Not a word.
	[Exit]
	My father hath set guard to take my brother;

	Intelligence is given where you are hid;
	And Regan with him: have you nothing said
EDGAR	                  I am sure on't, not a word.
	Draw; seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.
	[Exit EDGAR]
	[Wounds his arm]
	Stop, stop! No help?
GLOUCESTER	Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
	To stand auspicious mistress,--
EDMUND	Look, sir, I bleed.
EDMUND	Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could--
	[Exeunt some Servants]
EDMUND	Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;
	The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,
EDGAR	Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
	Methinks thy voice is alter'd; and thou speak'st
	But in my garments.
EDGAR	Come on, sir; here's the place: stand still. How fearful
	Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!
	Diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
	Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight


	Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off;

	Is done to cure it.
	Shake patiently my great affliction off:
	Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!

	Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought,
	What are you, sir?
EDGAR	Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
	Ten masts at each make not the altitude
GLOUCESTER	But have I fall'n, or no?
	Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.
	To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort,
EDGAR	Give me your arm:


	Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
	Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
	'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,
EDGAR	Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes here?
	The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
	king himself.
KING LEAR	Nature's above art in that respect. There's your
	cheese will do 't. There's my gauntlet; I'll prove


	me like a dog; and told me I had white hairs in my
	wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when
	thing; 'tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.

	Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:
	Was kinder to his father than my daughters
	Whose face between her forks presages snow;
	With a more riotous appetite.
	Beneath is all the fiends';
	fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet,
GLOUCESTER	O, let me kiss that hand!
GLOUCESTER	O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world
	at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! I'll not
GLOUCESTER	Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
Old Man	Madman and beggar too.
	Which made me think a man a worm: my son
	As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods.
	Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
	dearer father in my love.




	thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what
	impatience: the gods reward your kindness!
EDGAR	Frateretto calls me; and tells me
Fool	Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a


EDGAR	The foul fiend bites my back.



	Wantest thou eyes at trial, madam?
	And she must not speak
	nightingale. Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two
KENT	How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed:


	Bench by his side:
	you are o' the commission,
	Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
	Pur! the cat is gray.
	poor king her father.
KING LEAR	She cannot deny it.
KING LEAR	And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim

	That thou so oft have boasted to retain?

EDGAR	Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
	Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
	Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
KING LEAR	Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds
	[To EDGAR]
	say they are Persian attire: but let them be changed.
KING LEAR	Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains:


	I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him:
	If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
	Give thee quick conduct.
	Which, if convenience will not allow,

GLOUCESTER	Come, come, away.
EDGAR	When we our betters see bearing our woes,
	But then the mind much sufferance doth o'er skip,
	He childed as I father'd! Tom, away!
	What will hap more to-night, safe 'scape the king!

	KING LEAR


CORNWALL	Post speedily to my lord your husband; show him
	[Exeunt some of the Servants]
GONERIL	Pluck out his eyes.
	upon your traitorous father are not fit for your
	betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my

	Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
	To have well-armed friends.
GONERIL	Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
	[Exeunt GONERIL, EDMUND, and OSWALD]

	Without the form of justice, yet our power
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, brought in by two or three]
CORNWALL	Bind fast his corky arms.




REGAN	So white, and such a traitor!
	Will quicken, and accuse thee: I am your host:
CORNWALL	Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
CORNWALL	And what confederacy have you with the traitors






	The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
	If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,

GLOUCESTER	He that will think to live till he be old,

	I have served you ever since I was a child;
REGAN	How now, you dog!



	To see some mischief on him. O!
CORNWALL	Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
	Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature,
	Thou call'st on him that hates thee: it was he
GLOUCESTER	O my follies! then Edgar was abused.
	His way to Dover.
	How is't, my lord? how look you?
	Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:

	By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
	Beloved sons, be yours: which to confirm,

	As my great patron thought on in my prayers,--
KENT	Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
	When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound,
	Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;
KING LEAR	Kent, on thy life, no more.
	Thy safety being the motive.
KENT	See better, Lear; and let me still remain

KING LEAR	O, vassal! miscreant!


	Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy doom;
KING LEAR	Hear me, recreant!
	To come between our sentence and our power,
	To shield thee from diseases of the world;
	The moment is thy death. Away! by Jupiter,
	Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
	The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,

	He'll shape his old course in a country new.
	[Flourish. Re-enter GLOUCESTER, with KING OF FRANCE,

	Will you require in present dower with her,
	I crave no more than what your highness offer'd,
	When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
	And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,

	Take her, or leave her?

	[To KING OF FRANCE]
	To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you

	Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time
	That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection

	I'll do't before I speak,--that you make known
	But even for want of that for which I am richer,

KING OF FRANCE	Is it but this,--a tardiness in nature
	When it is mingled with regards that stand
BURGUNDY	Royal Lear,

	That you must lose a husband.
	I shall not be his wife.
	Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:
	Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance,
GLOUCESTER	Then, prithee, get thee gone: if, for my sake,
	Who I'll entreat to lead me.
GLOUCESTER	'Tis the times' plague, when madmen lead the blind.
Old Man	I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,




	Tom hath been scared out of his good wits: bless
	stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of
GLOUCESTER	Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues
	That slaves your ordinance, that will not see

	Looks fearfully in the confined deep:
	I shall no leading need.




	[Enter GONERIL and EDMUND]


	His answer was 'The worse:' of Gloucester's treachery,
	What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
	It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
	Hasten his musters and conduct his powers:
	If you dare venture in your own behalf,



	To thee a woman's services are due:


	You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
	She that herself will sliver and disbranch
GONERIL	No more; the text is foolish.
	Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
	Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
	It will come,
GONERIL	Milk-liver'd man!
	Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
	Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still, and criest
	Proper deformity seems not in the fiend

	They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
GONERIL	Marry, your manhood now--
ALBANY	What news?
	The other eye of Gloucester.
Messenger	A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
	But not without that harmful stroke, which since
	You justicers, that these our nether crimes
Messenger	Both, both, my lord.
GONERIL	[Aside]              One way I like this well;
	The news is not so tart.--I'll read, and answer.
ALBANY	Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
ALBANY	He is not here.
ALBANY	Knows he the wickedness?
	Might have the freer course.

KENT	Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My

KENT	Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.
KENT	That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
	That in the natures of their lords rebel;
	Knowing nought, like dogs, but following.
	I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
GLOUCESTER	How fell you out? say that.


	I have seen better faces in my time
CORNWALL	This is some fellow,
	An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
	Than twenty silly ducking observants
	Under the allowance of your great aspect,
CORNWALL	What mean'st by this?
	flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain

	It pleased the king his master very late
	And put upon him such a deal of man,
	Drew on me here again.


	You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
CORNWALL	Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,

REGAN	Sir, being his knave, I will.

	His fault is much, and the good king his master
	Are punish'd with: the king must take it ill,
CORNWALL	I'll answer that.
	For following her affairs. Put in his legs.
	Come, my good lord, away.
GLOUCESTER	I am sorry for thee, friend; 'tis the duke's pleasure,
KENT	Pray, do not, sir: I have watched and travell'd hard;


	Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
	Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
	Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
	[Sleeps]

ACT II
SCENE III	A wood.

	That guard, and most unusual vigilance,
	That ever penury, in contempt of man,
	The winds and persecutions of the sky.
	Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
	Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!

	KING LEAR


KING LEAR	'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
	The night before there was no purpose in them

KENT	No, my lord.
	the loins, and men by the legs: when a man's
KING LEAR	What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
	Your son and daughter.
KENT	Yes.
KENT	I say, yea.
KENT	Yes, they have.
KENT	By Juno, I swear, ay.
	To do upon respect such violent outrage:

	My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
	Which presently they read: on whose contents,
	And meeting here the other messenger,
	Having more man than wit about me, drew:

	But fathers that bear bags
	But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours
	Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow,

	[Exit]
KENT	None.
	question, thou hadst well deserved it.
Fool	We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee
	that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel
	gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I
