	The question of Cordelia and her father
	Not as a brother.
	Remember what I tell you.
	What grows of it, no matter; advise your fellows so:
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KENT, disguised]
	For which I razed my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
	[Horns within. Enter KING LEAR, Knights, and
	That, when we have found the king,--in which your pain




	Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,


	You owe me no subscription: then let fall
	Your high engender'd battles 'gainst a head
	That dotage gives it.
	Within a fortnight!
KING LEAR	I'll tell thee:
	That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
KING LEAR	It may be so, my lord.
	Dry up in her the organs of increase;
	Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;
	To have a thankless child! Away, away!

	The which immediacy may well stand up,
	More than in your addition.
	Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance,
	To quit this horrid act.
	Who is too good to pity thee.
REGAN	Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
	How is't, my lord? how look you?
	Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.
	If this man come to good.

Third Servant	Go thou: I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs


SCENE I	The heath.
EDGAR	Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,
	The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, led by an Old Man]

	Of differences, which I least thought it fit
	Which craves the instant use.
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KENT and OSWALD, severally]

OSWALD	Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.


KENT	A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a
	one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a
	the least syllable of thy addition.
KENT	What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou
CORDELIA	We are not the first

	And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
	As if we were God's spies: and we'll wear out,

	The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell,


	Are as the time is: to be tender-minded
Captain	I'll do 't, my lord.


	He flashes into one gross crime or other,
	If you come slack of former services,
	[Horns within]
	Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,
	With cheques as flatteries,--when they are seen abused.
EDMUND	Spake you with him?
	displeasure in him by word or countenance?
	him: and at my entreaty forbear his presence

	slower; and, as I say, retire with me to my
EDGAR	Armed, brother!
	and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image
EDMUND	I do serve you in this business.
	Whose nature is so far from doing harms,




OSWALD	Yes, madam.
	And leave thee in the storm,

	[Re-enter KING LEAR with GLOUCESTER]
	Fetch me a better answer.
	In his own course.

GLOUCESTER	Ay, my good lord.
	Fiery? the fiery duke? Tell the hot duke that--
	To suffer with the body: I'll forbear;
	[Looking on KENT]
	Go tell the duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them,
	I tell you all her wealth.
	I would not from your love make such a stray,

	Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
	Must be a faith that reason without miracle
	To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,
	But even for want of that for which I am richer,
Gentleman	Help, help, O, help!




	[Exit Gentleman]
	The time will not allow the compliment
	Is he not here?

EDMUND	                  Yet Edmund was beloved:

	Nay, send in time.
	Thy token of reprieve.
ALBANY	Haste thee, for thy life.
	To hang Cordelia in the prison, and


	She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass;

KING LEAR	This feather stirs; she lives! if it be so,

KING LEAR	A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
	I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
	I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
KENT	If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
KENT	The same,

KENT	That, from your first of difference and decay,
KENT	Nor no man else: all's cheerless, dark, and deadly.


ALBANY	That's but a trifle here.
	To him our absolute power:
	With boot, and such addition as your honours
KING LEAR	And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life!
	Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,
EDGAR	He faints! My lord, my lord!

EDGAR	He is gone, indeed.
ALBANY	Bear them from hence. Our present business
	Friends of my soul, you twain



	Since that respects of fortune are his love,
	We do require them of you, so to use them
	To send the old and miserable king
	Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;
	[To KENT]
	Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here:
	With how depraved a quality--O Regan!

	She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,

	Shows like a riotous inn: epicurism and lust
	A little to disquantity your train;
KING LEAR	Darkness and devils!
GONERIL	You strike my people; and your disorder'd rabble
KING LEAR	Woe, that too late repents,--
	Is it your will? Speak, sir. Prepare my horses.
ALBANY	Pray, sir, be patient.
	And in the most exact regard support
	And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
	And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
	A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
	Hadst not been born than not to have pleased me better.
	What say you to the lady? Love's not love
BURGUNDY	Royal Lear,
	And woes by wrong imaginations lose
	[Drum afar off]
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR


	And every measure fail me.

KENT	Pardon me, dear madam;
CORDELIA	Then be't so, my good lord.

	The untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up

	We put fresh garments on him.
CORDELIA	Very well.
	Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss

	In the most terrible and nimble stroke
	To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,
Doctor	Madam, do you; 'tis fittest.
	Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound

Doctor	He's scarce awake: let him alone awhile.
	I will not swear these are my hands: let's see;
	And hold your hands in benediction o'er me:
	Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
	What place this is; and all the skill I have

	I know you do not love me; for your sisters

KING LEAR	Do not abuse me.
	Desire him to go in; trouble him no more
KING LEAR	You must bear with me:
Gentleman	Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?


	well, sir.
	Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.

ACT V

EDMUND	Know of the duke if his last purpose hold,
	[To a Gentleman, who goes out]






	Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,

Old Man	Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.
	Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
Old Man	How now! Who's there?
	That to our sister you do make return;
	'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
	That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'
KING LEAR	[Rising]  Never, Regan:
	On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
KING LEAR	You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
REGAN	O the blest gods! so will you wish on me,
	Thee o'er to harshness: her eyes are fierce; but thine
	Against my coming in: thou better know'st

	[Tucket within]
	That she would soon be here.

CORNWALL	What means your grace?
	[Enter GONERIL]


KING LEAR	O sides, you are too tough;

	You will return and sojourn with my sister,
KING LEAR	Return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd?
	Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
	To this detested groom.

	Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
	I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,

	Must be content to think you old, and so--
REGAN	I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?
	Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.
REGAN	Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,

KING LEAR	Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
REGAN	And speak't again, my lord; no more with me.

	And thou art twice her love.
	Have a command to tend you?
	Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
	Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need,--
	Against their father, fool me not so much
	That all the world shall--I will do such things,--

	auricular assurance have your satisfaction; and
EDMUND	Nor is not, sure.
	business after your own wisdom. I would unstate

	friendship falls off, brothers divide: in
	falls from bias of nature; there's father against
	lose thee nothing; do it carefully. And the

	if we were villains by necessity; fools by
	by a divine thrusting on: an admirable evasion
	major; so that it follows, I am rough and
	[Enter EDGAR]
	portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi.
EDMUND	I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read
EDMUND	I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed
	diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation
EDMUND	Come, come; when saw you my father last?
	That under covert and convenient seeming

	More harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised;
KING LEAR	My wits begin to turn.
	your hovel.


Fool	This is a brave night to cool a courtezan.
	No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
	When usurers tell their gold i' the field;
	That going shall be used with feet.


SCENE III	Gloucester's castle.
GLOUCESTER	Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural
	him, nor any way sustain him.
	the dukes; and a worse matter than that: I have
	must incline to the king. I will seek him, and
	the king my old master must be relieved. There is
EDMUND	This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke




	For nature to endure.

KENT	I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
	The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'ldst shun a bear;
	Doth from my senses take all feeling else
	To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.

	On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.
	Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
	That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
	Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,


KENT	What art thou that dost grumble there i' the straw?
EDGAR	Away! the foul fiend follows me!
	And art thou come to this?
	that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters
	de, do de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds,
	[Storm still]
Fool	Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
	She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
	Till it cry sleep to death.

	o' the coxcombs with a stick, and cried 'Down,

	[KENT is set at liberty]
	I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
	The terrors of the earth. You think I'll weep

CORNWALL	Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.
GONERIL	'Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest,


CORNWALL	Whither is he going?

	There's scarce a bush.
	He is attended with a desperate train;
	My Regan counsels well; come out o' the storm.



Gentleman	One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
	Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea,
	Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn
	And bids what will take all.
	His heart-struck injuries.
	Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
	Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen,
	But, true it is, from France there comes a power
	If on my credit you dare build so far
	I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;

	As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring;
Gentleman	Give me your hand: have you no more to say?





	most required and necessary.

	And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
KENT	O, then it moved her.
	Were like a better way: those happy smilets,
	If all could so become it.
	Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart:
	And clamour moisten'd: then away she started
	Else one self mate and mate could not beget
KENT	Was this before the king return'd?
	Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers

	His mind so venomously, that burning shame
KENT	Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
	And leave you to attend him: some dear cause

	KING LEAR

	[Enter, with drum and colours, CORDELIA, Doctor, and Soldiers]
	With bur-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,
	To temper clay. Yea, it is come to this?


GLOUCESTER	He has some reason, else he could not beg.
	more since.
	Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
	Thou wilt o'ertake us, hence a mile or twain,
Old Man	Alack, sir, he is mad.


	[Aside]

EDGAR	Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor
	stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of
	Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
	So distribution should undo excess,
GLOUCESTER	There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
	I shall no leading need.
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter GONERIL and EDMUND]
	[Enter OSWALD]
	I told him of the army that was landed;
	And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out:
	It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
	I must change arms at home, and give the distaff

	Conceive, and fare thee well.

	My fool usurps my body.

ALBANY	O Goneril!
	She that herself will sliver and disbranch

	Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
	Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
GONERIL	Milk-liver'd man!
	Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?

GONERIL	O vain fool!
	They are apt enough to dislocate and tear

Messenger	O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall's dead:

	But not without that harmful stroke, which since
	So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
	'Tis from your sister.
	Upon my hateful life: another way,
ALBANY	Where was his son when they did take his eyes?

Messenger	Ay, my good lord; 'twas he inform'd against him;
	To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king,
	So beggars marry many.
	For there was never yet fair woman but she made

Fool	Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece; that's a wise
	Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
	The affliction nor the fear.
	That hast within thee undivulged crimes,

GONERIL	Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
	With the ancient of war on our proceedings.

GONERIL	[Aside]  O, ho, I know the riddle.--I will go.
	Hear me one word.

	What is avouched there. If you miscarry,

ALBANY	Why, fare thee well: I will o'erlook thy paper.


EDMUND	To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
	Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
	His speedy taking off. As for the mercy




	[Enter EDGAR and GLOUCESTER]
	I'll bring you comfort.

	Give me thy hand; come on.
	Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, EDMUND,
	Until their greater pleasures first be known
	[Exeunt KING LEAR, KENT, and Attendants]
	To the great love I bear you,--

	A fox, when one has caught her,

	At point a hundred knights: yes, that, on every dream,
ALBANY	Well, you may fear too far.
	What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister


	And hasten your return.
	This milky gentleness and course of yours
ALBANY	How far your eyes may pierce I can not tell:
ALBANY	Well, well; the event.

ACT I

	Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you
	your letter.
	danger of kibes?
	slip-shod.
	for though she's as like this as a crab's like an
Fool	She will taste as like this as a crab does to a


Fool	Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
	daughters, and leave his horns without a case.
Fool	Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the
Fool	Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.
	for being old before thy time.
	been wise.
	[Enter Gentleman]





CURAN	And you, sir. I have been with your father, and

EDMUND	Not I	pray you, what are they?
EDMUND	Not a word.

	Which I must act: briefness and fortune, work!
	My father watches: O sir, fly this place;
	And Regan with him: have you nothing said

	Fly, brother. Torches, torches! So, farewell.

	Stop, stop! No help?

GLOUCESTER	But where is he?

	[Exeunt some Servants]
	But that I told him, the revenging gods
	To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion,

Doctor	There is means, madam:

	Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
Messenger	News, madam;
	It is thy business that I go about;
	Soon may I hear and see him!

ACT IV


OSWALD	Madam, with much ado:
OSWALD	No, madam.

	In pity of his misery, to dispatch

	My lady charged my duty in this business.
	Let me unseal the letter.
	I am sure of that: and at her late being here

	Than for your lady's: you may gather more.
	If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,



SCENE VI	Fields near Dover.
GLOUCESTER	When shall we come to the top of that same hill?

Gentleman	As I learn'd,


	nether-stocks.
KENT	                  It is both he and she;
KENT	Yes.

KING LEAR	By Jupiter, I swear, no.
	They could not, would not do 't; 'tis worse than murder,

	Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
	Commanded me to follow, and attend
	Display'd so saucily against your highness,--

	Shall see their children kind.

KENT	With the earl, sir, here within.
	[Exit]
	How chance the king comes with so small a train?
KENT	Why, fool?
	there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him
	gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I

	Judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot

	man's sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud
EDGAR	A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that curled
	slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it:
	Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of
	Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.
KING LEAR	Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer
	's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself:
	[Tearing off his clothes]
	rest on's body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.
	at curfew, and walks till the first cock; he gives
	He met the night-mare, and her nine-fold;
KENT	How fares your grace?

	the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
	hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his

KENT	A man, sir.
	him truly that will put me in trust: to love him
KING LEAR	What art thou?
	king, thou art poor enough. What wouldst thou?

KENT	No, sir; but you have that in your countenance
KENT	Authority.
	tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message

KING LEAR	Follow me; thou shalt serve me: if I like thee no
	[Exit an Attendant]

KING LEAR	What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.

Knight	He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
	not.
	judgment, your highness is not entertained with that

	highness wronged.
	than as a very pretence and purpose of unkindness:
	fool hath much pined away.
	[Exit an Attendant]



	[Striking him]




Fool	Let me hire him too: here's my coxcomb.

Fool	Why, for taking one's part that's out of favour:
	thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.
Fool	If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs
Fool	Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped
Fool	Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
	Have more than thou showest,
	Set less than thou throwest;

	nothing, nuncle?
	his land comes to: he will not believe a fool.
	bitter fool and a sweet fool?
	To give away thy land,
	The one in motley here,
Fool	All thy other titles thou hast given away; that
Fool	No, faith, lords and great men will not let me; if

	clovest thy crown i' the middle, and gavest away
	finds it so.
	Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.
	Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
	[Flourish. Exeunt all but KING OF FRANCE, GONERIL,
CORDELIA	The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
	But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,


KING OF FRANCE	Come, my fair Cordelia.
	most nearly appertains to us both. I think our
GONERIL	You see how full of changes his age is; the

	rash; then must we look to receive from his age,
REGAN	Such unconstant starts are we like to have from
	together: if our father carry authority with



SCENE II	The Earl of Gloucester's castle.
EDMUND	Thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law
	Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
	Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
	Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land:
	Shall top the legitimate. I grow; I prosper:
GLOUCESTER	Kent banish'd thus! and France in choler parted!
EDMUND	So please your lordship, none.

EDMUND	Nothing, my lord.
	if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.
	fit for your o'er-looking.
	contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.
	this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
	them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage
	revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your
	Had he a hand to write this? a heart and brain
	cunning of it; I found it thrown in at the
EDMUND	If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear



	Where is he?
	testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain

KENT	Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the
OSWALD	Help, ho! murder! help!
	[Beating him]
	REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants]
	flesh ye; come on, young master.
	He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?

	tailor made thee.
	not have made him so ill, though he had been but two
	dearer father in my love.

ACT III

	thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what

	Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
KING LEAR	A king, a king!



	[To the Fool]
	Wantest thou eyes at trial, madam?
	Why she dares not come over to thee.
	food for thee.
KING LEAR	I'll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.



	Thy sheep shall take no harm.
	poor king her father.

	Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!
KENT	O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,

	Be thy mouth or black or white,
	Tom will make them weep and wail:

	[To EDGAR]


GLOUCESTER	Come hither, friend: where is the king my master?
	I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him:
	With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
KENT	Oppressed nature sleeps:
	[To the Fool]
GLOUCESTER	Come, come, away.
	We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
	How light and portable my pain seems now,
	In thy just proof, repeals and reconciles thee.




	[Exeunt some of the Servants]

	a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the
	[Enter OSWALD]
	Some five or six and thirty of his knights,

CORNWALL	Edmund, farewell.

GONERIL	Holla, holla!
	Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
GONERIL	Mean you to enjoy him?

ALBANY	Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee

	If you will marry, make your loves to me,
ALBANY	Thou art arm'd, Gloucester: let the trumpet sound:
	[Throwing down a glove]

EDMUND	There's my exchange:
	That names me traitor, villain-like he lies:
ALBANY	A herald, ho!
	All levied in my name, have in my name
ALBANY	She is not well; convey her to my tent.


	supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold

	[Second trumpet]


	Your name, your quality? and why you answer
	Yet am I noble as the adversary
EDGAR	What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
	That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
	Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
	To the descent and dust below thy foot,

	By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn:
	Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!





EDMUND	What you have charged me with, that have I done;

	The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
EDMUND	                  Thou hast spoken right, 'tis true;
	Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
ALBANY	Where have you hid yourself?
	The bloody proclamation to escape,
	That very dogs disdain'd: and in this habit
	Until some half-hour past, when I was arm'd:
	'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
	You look as you had something more to say.

	Whilst I was big in clamour came there in a man,
	As he'ld burst heaven; threw him on my father;
	And there I left him tranced.
	Follow'd his enemy king, and did him service
	Fools had ne'er less wit in a year;
KING LEAR	When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?

	That such a king should play bo-peep,

	have me whipped for lying; and sometimes I am
	the parings.
	Methinks you are too much of late i' the frown.
	thou art nothing.
	bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum,

	Do hourly carp and quarrel; breaking forth
	That you protect this course, and put it on
	Which else were shame, that then necessity
	That it's had it head bit off by it young.
GONERIL	Come, sir,

	Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
Fool	Lear's shadow.

GONERIL	This admiration, sir, is much o' the savour
	[Exeunt other Servants]
	May blame, but not control. Who's there? the traitor?


REGAN	                  Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!


	Will quicken, and accuse thee: I am your host:


	And not from one opposed.

REGAN	Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril--

	In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
	If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
CORNWALL	See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.

First Servant	Hold your hand, my lord:
REGAN	How now, you dog!
CORNWALL	My villain!

First Servant	O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
CORNWALL	Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
	DRAMATIS PERSONAE
KING OF FRANCE:

EARL OF GLOUCESTER	(GLOUCESTER:)

Doctor:



	|
	Soldiers, and Attendants


ACT I

	Albany than Cornwall.
	weighed, that curiosity in neither can make choice
GLOUCESTER	His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I have


	elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account:
	noble gentleman, Edmund?
	honourable friend.



KING LEAR	Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
	Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
	Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
	Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
GONERIL	Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
	A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable;

	Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,
	And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
	And find I am alone felicitate
	More richer than my tongue.
	Than that conferr'd on Goneril. Now, our joy,

CORDELIA	Nothing.
	My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty

	Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
	To love my father all.

KING LEAR	Let it be so; thy truth, then, be thy dower:
	Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
	To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom

	So be my grave my peace, as here I give
	I do invest you jointly with my power,
	Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain

	Loved as my father, as my master follow'd,
KENT	Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
	When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom;
	Reverbs no hollowness.
	To wage against thy enemies; nor fear to lose it,
KENT	See better, Lear; and let me still remain
KENT	                  Now, by Apollo, king,
	[Laying his hand on his sword]
CORNWALL	|
	Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy doom;
	On thine allegiance, hear me!
	Our potency made good, take thy reward.
	Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
	Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
	That justly think'st, and hast most rightly said!
	That good effects may spring from words of love.


	Or cease your quest of love?

	Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,


GLOUCESTER	What, hath your grace no better company?
GLOUCESTER	Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
GLOUCESTER	Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer
	And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
KENT	Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.
EDGAR	How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.
	His wits begin to unsettle.

	Now outlaw'd from my blood; he sought my life,


KENT	                  This way, my lord.
KENT	Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.

EDGAR	      Child Rowland to the dark tower came,




	of.
	badness in himself.
	of France: O heavens! that this treason were not,
EDMUND	If the matter of this paper be certain, you have
	may be ready for our apprehension.
	between that and my blood.
	Bold in the quarrel's right, roused to the encounter,
	Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
	Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
	I threaten'd to discover him: he replied,
	As this I would: ay, though thou didst produce
	Were very pregnant and potential spurs

	The duke must grant me that: besides, his picture





	To have the expense and waste of his revenues.

EDMUND	'Twas my duty, sir.
CORNWALL	Is he pursued?
	Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpose,
	You we first seize on.
GLOUCESTER	For him I thank your grace.

	Methinks thy voice is alter'd; and thou speak'st

	The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
	Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
	Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
EDGAR	Give me your hand: you are now within a foot
	Here, friend, 's another purse; in it a jewel
EDGAR	Now fare you well, good sir.
	Is done to cure it.
	If I could bear it longer, and not fall

	The treasury of life, when life itself
	What are you, sir?
	So many fathom down precipitating,
	Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.
	Look up a-height; the shrill-gorged lark so far
	To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort,
	Up: so. How is 't? Feel you your legs? You stand.
	Upon the crown o' the cliff, what thing was that
EDGAR	As I stood here below, methought his eyes
	Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
	I took it for a man; often 'twould say
	[Enter KING LEAR, fantastically dressed with wild flowers]
KING LEAR	No, they cannot touch me for coining; I am the
KING LEAR	Nature's above art in that respect. There's your
	it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well

KING LEAR	Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered
	wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when

	When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
	Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester's bastard son
	Whose face between her forks presages snow;
	Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
	sulphurous pit,

GLOUCESTER	O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world
	love. Read thou this challenge; mark but the
EDGAR	I would not take this from report; it is,


	justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in
GLOUCESTER	Ay, sir.
	Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
	Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
	To seal the accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes;
EDGAR	O, matter and impertinency mix'd! Reason in madness!
	Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air,
KING LEAR	When we are born, we cry that we are come
	Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
	Your most dear daughter--
	I am cut to the brains.
	Why, this would make a man a man of salt,

Gentleman	You are a royal one, and we obey you.
	[Exit running; Attendants follow]
	Which twain have brought her to.


	Stands on the hourly thought.
	Her army is moved on.

EDGAR	Well pray you, father.
	Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
	The bounty and the benison of heaven
OSWALD	A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!



EDGAR	Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk
	the harder: ch'ill be plain with you.
	your foins.
	If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
	[Dies]

	May be my friends. He's dead; I am only sorry

	want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered.
		'Your--wife, so I would say--
	And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,
	That of thy death and business I can tell.
OSWALD	This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared
	unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of

KENT	That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
	Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
	Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?


CORNWALL	No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
	Before me at this instant.
	Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
	Than twenty silly ducking observants
	Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
KENT	To go out of my dialect, which you
	to entreat me to 't.
	It pleased the king his master very late
	That worthied him, got praises of the king
KENT	None of these rogues and cowards
	We'll teach you--
	You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
	There shall he sit till noon.
	You should not use me so.
	Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
	His fault is much, and the good king his master
	That he's so slightly valued in his messenger,
REGAN	My sister may receive it much more worse,

GLOUCESTER	I am sorry for thee, friend; 'tis the duke's pleasure,
	Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.

	To the warm sun!
	Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
	This shameful lodging.


SCENE III	A wood.
EDGAR	I heard myself proclaim'd;
	I will preserve myself: and am bethought
	And with presented nakedness out-face
	Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
	That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.

ACT II

