	[Horns within. Enter KING LEAR, Knights, and
	And make them keep their caves: since I was man,
	The affliction nor the fear.
	Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,

	of France: O heavens! that this treason were not,

CORNWALL	True or false, it hath made thee earl of
EDMUND	[Aside]  If I find him comforting the king, it will

	I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;
Gentleman	I will talk further with you.
	Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take
	That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!

	Holla the other.




	You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
	Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,

	here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.

	Shall be applied: for us we will resign,
	[To EDGAR and KENT]
	Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
KING LEAR	And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life!
	Pray you, undo this button: thank you, sir.
	[Dies]
KENT	Break, heart; I prithee, break!
KENT	Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him much
EDGAR	He is gone, indeed.

	[To KENT and EDGAR]

ALBANY	The weight of this sad time we must obey;

	That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
	But I will tarry; the fool will stay,


	They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches;
GLOUCESTER	My dear lord,



	Would with his daughter speak, commands her service:
	Infirmity doth still neglect all office
	And am fall'n out with my more headier will,
	[Looking on KENT]
	Is practise only. Give me my servant forth.
	Till it cry sleep to death.
	[Exit]
Fool	Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels
	kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
KING LEAR	Good morrow to you both.
	[KENT is set at liberty]
KING LEAR	Regan, I think you are; I know what reason

	Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
	[Points to his heart]


	Would fail her obligation: if, sir, perchance

	Nature in you stands on the very verge
	many opportunities to cut him off: if your will
	the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply
		'GONERIL.'
	Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
	That of thy death and business I can tell.
KENT	If but as well I other accents borrow,
	If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
	I stumbled when I saw: full oft 'tis seen,
	Might I but live to see thee in my touch,


	So long as we can say  'This is the worst.'
KENT	                  This way, my lord.



	His word was still,--Fie, foh, and fum,

	KING LEAR


CORNWALL	I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
	of.
	Of what hath moved you.
	Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
	And from her derogate body never spring
	Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;
	How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is

	But let his disposition have that scope

ALBANY	What's the matter, sir?

	That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
	Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
	Let is be so: yet have I left a daughter,
	Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you,
KING LEAR	Ask her forgiveness?
	[Kneeling]

KING LEAR	[Rising]  Never, Regan:
	All the stored vengeances of heaven fall
CORNWALL	Fie, sir, fie!
	You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,
	When the rash mood is on.
	Thee o'er to harshness: her eyes are fierce; but thine
	And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
	Thy half o' the kingdom hast thou not forgot,


	That she would soon be here.
		       Is your lady come?
	Out, varlet, from my sight!
KING LEAR	Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope


	O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
	And dotage terms so.

KING LEAR	You! did you?
	You will return and sojourn with my sister,

	To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,--
	To knee his throne, and, squire-like; pension beg


	But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
	In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee;
	Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:
REGAN	Not altogether so:
	Must be content to think you old, and so--

	Speak 'gainst so great a number? How, in one house,
GONERIL	Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
	We could control them. If you will come to me,--


	With five and twenty, Regan? said you so?
KING LEAR	Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd,
	[To GONERIL]
	And thou art twice her love.
	To follow in a house where twice so many

	Man's life's as cheap as beast's: thou art a lady;
	You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
	Against their father, fool me not so much
	I will have such revenges on you both,
	And bring him to our eye.
		    What can man's wisdom
Doctor	There is means, madam:
	Will close the eye of anguish.
	Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate

	The British powers are marching hitherward.
	It is thy business that I go about;
	But love, dear love, and our aged father's right:

	KING LEAR


REGAN	But are my brother's powers set forth?
REGAN	Himself in person there?



	All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone,
	His nighted life: moreover, to descry

OSWALD	I may not, madam:
	Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
OSWALD	Madam, I had rather--
	She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks

OSWALD	Well, madam.
	I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
	[Exeunt]

ACT I
SCENE IV	A hall in the same.
	Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:


	[Exeunt]

ACT IV
SCENE VII	A tent in the French camp. LEAR on a bed asleep,
	[Enter CORDELIA, KENT, and Doctor]
	And every measure fail me.
	Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
	I prithee, put them off.
	My boon I make it, that you know me not


	Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
Doctor	So please your majesty
	I' the sway of your own will. Is he array'd?

CORDELIA	Very well.
CORDELIA	O my dear father! Restoration hang

	Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face
	Of quick, cross lightning? to watch--poor perdu!--
	To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,


	Do scald like moulten lead.
KING LEAR	You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?
Doctor	He's scarce awake: let him alone awhile.
	To see another thus. I know not what to say.


	And, to deal plainly,
	What place this is; and all the skill I have
	To be my child Cordelia.
KING LEAR	Be your tears wet? yes, 'faith. I pray, weep not:
	You have some cause, they have not.
KING LEAR	Am I in France?
KING LEAR	Do not abuse me.
	To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
CORDELIA	Will't please your highness walk?



	of Kent in Germany.

	[Exit]




	[Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN,
	Or whether since he is advised by aught
	[To a Gentleman, who goes out]
EDMUND	'Tis to be doubted, madam.
	Tell me--but truly--but then speak the truth,

EDMUND	That thought abuses you.

	Be not familiar with her.

	Should loosen him and me.
	With others whom the rigor of our state
	You owe me no subscription: then let fall
	That have with two pernicious daughters join'd
Fool	He that has a house to put's head in has a good
	The head and he shall louse;
	Shall of a corn cry woe,

	[Enter KENT]
Fool	Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece; that's a wise
	Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies
	That art incestuous: caitiff, to pieces shake,
	These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
	Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
	Which even but now, demanding after you,
KING LEAR	My wits begin to turn.
	That can make vile things precious. Come,

	With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,--
KING LEAR	True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
Fool	This is a brave night to cool a courtezan.
	When nobles are their tailors' tutors;
	When slanders do not live in tongues;
	Then shall the realm of Albion
	This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.




	dealing. When I desire their leave that I might
	him, nor any way sustain him.
GLOUCESTER	Go to; say you nothing. There's a division betwixt
	these injuries the king now bears will be revenged
	the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived:
	some strange thing toward, Edmund; pray you, be careful.
EDMUND	This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke
	The younger rises when the old doth fall.




	The tyranny of the open night's too rough



	The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'ldst shun a bear;
	The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind
	For lifting food to't? But I will punish home:
	Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,--
KENT	                  Good my lord, enter here.
	On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.
	In, boy; go first. You houseless poverty,--

	Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you
	That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,

	Help me, help me!
Fool	A spirit, a spirit: he says his name's poor Tom.

	Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.
	And art thou come to this?
	through ford and whirlipool e'er bog and quagmire;
	four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a
	charity, whom the foul fiend vexes: there could I

Fool	Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

	To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
	Those pelican daughters.

	keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with
KING LEAR	What hast thou been?
	my mistress' heart, and did the act of darkness with
	wine loved I deeply, dice dearly: and in woman
	Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of
	Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind:
	[Storm still]
	Is man no more than this? Consider him well. Thou
	unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare,
	[Tearing off his clothes]
	like an old lecher's heart; a small spark, all the

	hare-lip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the
	Bid her alight,
KENT	How fares your grace?
KENT	Who's there? What is't you seek?
EDGAR	Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad,
	the ditch-dog; drinks the green mantle of the
	body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear;

	Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.

	To obey in all your daughters' hard commands:
	And bring you where both fire and food is ready.

	What is your study?
KING LEAR	Let me ask you one word in private.


	I am almost mad myself: I had a son,
	The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this!
	Noble philosopher, your company.
GLOUCESTER	In, fellow, there, into the hovel: keep thee warm.
KING LEAR	Read.
KING LEAR	O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your

	with no eyes. Look with thine ears: see how yond
	a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
KING LEAR	And the creature run from the cur? There thou
	Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;
	Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
	Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
	Pull off my boots: harder, harder: so.
KING LEAR	If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
	We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.
KING LEAR	When we are born, we cry that we are come
	And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,

KING LEAR	No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even

	Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
Gentleman	Good sir,--
	My masters, know you that.
KING LEAR	Then there's life in't. Nay, if you get it, you

	Which twain have brought her to.
Gentleman	                  Sir, speed you: what's your will?
Gentleman	Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that,
	You look as you had something more to say.
	Hearing of this.
	To amplify too much, would make much more,
	Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
	Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
	And there I left him tranced.
EDGAR	Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise
	[Enter a Gentleman, with a bloody knife]
EDGAR	What kind of help?
EDGAR	What means that bloody knife?

	By her is poisoned; she hath confess'd it.

	This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,

	The time will not allow the compliment
	To bid my king and master aye good night:
	Speak, Edmund, where's the king? and where's Cordelia?

	The one the other poison'd for my sake,

	Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia:

EDMUND	Well thought on: take my sword,

	To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
ALBANY	The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
	[Re-enter KING LEAR, with CORDELIA dead in his arms;
	Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
	If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
	Who, with best meaning, have incurr'd the worst.

	And ask of thee forgiveness: so we'll live,
	Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out;
	That ebb and flow by the moon.
KING LEAR	Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
	The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
	[Exeunt KING LEAR and CORDELIA, guarded]

	One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost
	Does not become a sword: thy great employment
Captain	I'll do 't, my lord.
	As I have set it down.

	Captain, and Soldiers]
	That were the opposites of this day's strife:

	Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
	My reason all the same; and they are ready
	And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed


	Bore the commission of my place and person;
GONERIL	Not so hot:
	And more convenient is he for my hand
	I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.

REGAN	Fare thee well.






	Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,

	For these domestic and particular broils
	With the ancient of war on our proceedings.
REGAN	Sister, you'll go with us?
REGAN	'Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.
	[As they are going out, enter EDGAR disguised]


	I can produce a champion that will prove

	When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,


	Is now urged on you.
	[Exit]
	Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
	And hardly shall I carry out my side,
	His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
	Stands on me to defend, not to debate.





	For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:
GLOUCESTER	Grace go with you, sir!
	[Alarum and retreat within. Re-enter EDGAR]
	Give me thy hand; come on.
EDGAR	What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
GLOUCESTER	And that's true too.





	His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
	You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
	[Horns within]
	If he dislike it, let him to our sister,
	That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
	Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:
	Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see

KING OF FRANCE	Bid farewell to your sisters.
	And like a sister am most loath to call
	I would prefer him to a better place.

	And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
	Well may you prosper!
	[Exeunt KING OF FRANCE and CORDELIA]
	father will hence to-night.
GONERIL	You see how full of changes his age is; the
	appears too grossly.

	condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness
	him as this of Kent's banishment.
	together: if our father carry authority with
REGAN	We shall further think on't.
	[Exeunt]

ACT I
SCENE II	The Earl of Gloucester's castle.

	The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
	My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
	More composition and fierce quality
	Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land:
	And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
	[Enter GLOUCESTER]
	Confined to exhibition! All this done



	it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath
EDMUND	I beseech you, sir, pardon me: it is a letter

	contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.
EDMUND	I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote
	the world bitter to the best of our times; keeps
	as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to
	brother,	EDGAR.'
	Had he a hand to write this? a heart and brain
EDMUND	It was not brought me, my lord; there's the
GLOUCESTER	You know the character to be your brother's?
	fain think it were not.
EDMUND	It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is

	ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
	brutish villain! worse than brutish! Go, sirrah,
EDMUND	I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please
	course; where, if you violently proceed against
	The terrors of the earth. You think I'll weep
	Or ere I'll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!
	[Storm and tempest]
REGAN	This house is little: the old man and his people
	And must needs taste his folly.

CORNWALL	Follow'd the old man forth: he is return'd.
GLOUCESTER	The king is in high rage.
GLOUCESTER	He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.
GONERIL	My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
	There's scarce a bush.
	Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors:

	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR


KENT	Who's there, besides foul weather?
KENT	I know you. Where's the king?
	Or swell the curled water 'bove the main,
	Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn
	Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,

KENT	Sir, I do know you;
	With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
	Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen,
	Whereof perchance these are but furnishings;
	In some of our best ports, and are at point
	Bold in the quarrel's right, roused to the encounter,
GLOUCESTER	Let him fly far:
	By his authority I will proclaim it,

	'Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,
	As this I would: ay, though thou didst produce
	If they not thought the profits of my death
GLOUCESTER	Strong and fasten'd villain

	I will send far and near, that all the kingdom

	Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

	He whom my father named? your Edgar?
REGAN	Was he not companion with the riotous knights

	'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
	That if they come to sojourn at my house,
	Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father

CORNWALL	Is he pursued?
CORNWALL	If he be taken, he shall never more
	So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
EDMUND	I shall serve you, sir,

	Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
	To answer from our home; the several messengers
	Which craves the instant use.




	[Enter KENT and OSWALD, severally]
KENT	Ay.
KENT	I' the mire.
KENT	I love thee not.
KENT	If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee


	lily-livered, action-taking knave, a whoreson,
	the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pandar,

KENT	What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou
	shines; I'll make a sop o' the moonshine of you:

	king; and take vanity the puppet's part against the
OSWALD	Help, ho! murder! help!


EDMUND	How now! What's the matter?

	He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
CORNWALL	What is your difference? speak.
KENT	No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour. You
CORNWALL	Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?
	Tell me what more thou know'st.




	know you the reason?
	of; which imports to the kingdom so much
KENT	Who hath he left behind him general?
KENT	Did your letters pierce the queen to any
	And now and then an ample tear trill'd down

	Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
	What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence,

	Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart:
	The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
KENT	It is the stars,


	Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
Gentleman	Why, good sir?
	To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights


	And leave you to attend him: some dear cause
	Along with me.



	[Enter, with drum and colours, CORDELIA, Doctor, and Soldiers]
	Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
	Search every acre in the high-grown field,
REGAN	In my rights,

	That eye that told you so look'd but a-squint.
	Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;



	On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,

	And I, her husband, contradict your bans.
GONERIL	An interlude!
	Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,




	On him, on you, who not? I will maintain

	All levied in my name, have in my name


	And read out this.
	[A trumpet sounds]
	supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold
EDMUND	Sound!
Herald	Again!
Herald	Again!
	[Trumpet answers within]

Herald	What are you?
EDGAR	Know, my name is lost;


	That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
	Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
	Conspirant 'gainst this high-illustrious prince;
	This sword, this arm, and my best spirits, are bent
EDMUND	In wisdom I should ask thy name;
	By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn:
	This sword of mine shall give them instant way,

	By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
ALBANY	Shut your mouth, dame,

	Who can arraign me for't.


	And more, much more; the time will bring it out:

	My name is Edgar, and thy father's son.
	Cost him his eyes.

	Did hate thee or thy father!
ALBANY	Where have you hid yourself?
	And when 'tis told, O, that my heart would burst!
	Rather than die at once!--taught me to shift
	Their precious stones new lost: became his guide,
	Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
	'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
	How near's the other army?

	Her army is moved on.
	[Exit Gentleman]
	To die before you please!
GLOUCESTER	Now, good sir, what are you?
	Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
	The bounty and the benison of heaven

	Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out
	Put strength enough to't.
OSWALD	Wherefore, bold peasant,


	Nay, come not near th' old man; keep out, che vor
OSWALD	Out, dunghill!




	I might have saved her; now she's gone for ever!
	I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
KING LEAR	Did I not, fellow?
	Mine eyes are not o' the best: I'll tell you straight.

	Your servant Kent: Where is your servant Caius?


KING LEAR	You are welcome hither.
	And desperately are dead.
ALBANY	He knows not what he says: and vain it is




	him truly that will put me in trust: to love him


KENT	Service.
KENT	You.
KENT	No, sir; but you have that in your countenance


	qualified in; and the best of me is diligence.
KENT	Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor
KING LEAR	Follow me; thou shalt serve me: if I like thee no







KING LEAR	He would not!
	ceremonious affection as you were wont; there's a

	for my duty cannot be silent when I think your
	have perceived a most faint neglect of late; which I
	have not seen him this two days.

	[Exit an Attendant]
	[Exit an Attendant]
	O, you sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I,

OSWALD	I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
	[Striking him]
KENT	Nor tripped neither, you base football player.
KING LEAR	I thank thee, fellow; thou servest me, and I'll
	away, away! if you will measure your lubber's
	[Pushes OSWALD out]




	nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits,
	thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.

KING LEAR	Take heed, sirrah; the whip.


	Have more than thou showest,
	Learn more than thou trowest,
	And thou shalt have more


	his land comes to: he will not believe a fool.
Fool	Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a

	Do thou for him stand:
	The other found out there.
Fool	All thy other titles thou hast given away; that

	to myself; they'll be snatching. Give me an egg,

	both parts, thou borest thy ass on thy back o'er
	finds it so.
	[They fight, and EDGAR knocks him down]
	And give the letters which thou find'st about me
	[Dies]
	As badness would desire.
EDGAR	Sit you down, father; rest you
	Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not:
	[Reads]
	They know not how their wits to wear,


	And I for sorrow sung,
	Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach

	whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any
	the parings.
KING LEAR	How now, daughter! what makes that frontlet on?
	care for her frowning; now thou art an O without a
	[To GONERIL]
	He that keeps nor crust nor crum,

	But other of your insolent retinue
	To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,
	Would not 'scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
	Will call discreet proceeding.
	That it's had it head bit off by it young.

	These dispositions, that of late transform you
	draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I love thee.
	Either his notion weakens, his discernings
Fool	Lear's shadow.
	I should be false persuaded I had daughters.
KING LEAR	Your name, fair gentlewoman?
	To understand my purposes aright:
EDGAR	Why, the night gone by.
EDGAR	Ay, two hours together.

	him: and at my entreaty forbear his presence
	would scarcely allay.
EDMUND	That's my fear. I pray you, have a continent
	hear my lord speak: pray ye, go; there's my key:

	and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image


	My practises ride easy! I see the business.
	[Exit]

ACT I
SCENE III	The Duke of Albany's palace.


Third Servant	If she live long,
Second Servant	Let's follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam
Third Servant	Go thou: I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs

	KING LEAR


EDGAR	Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,
	The lamentable change is from the best;
	Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?
	My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
Old Man	O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and
	Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
	for him, that he hath wrote this to feel my
GLOUCESTER	Think you so?
	auricular assurance have your satisfaction; and

	loves him. Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him

GLOUCESTER	These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend
	friendship falls off, brothers divide: in
	prediction; there's son against father: the king
	ruinous disorders, follow us disquietly to our
	offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.
EDMUND	This is the excellent foppery of the world, that,
	if we were villains by necessity; fools by
	planetary influence; and all that we are evil in,
	father compounded with my mother under the
	had the maidenliest star in the firmament

	portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi.

EDGAR	Do you busy yourself about that?
	and the parent; death, dearth, dissolutions of
	of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
EDMUND	Come, come; when saw you my father last?
	DRAMATIS PERSONAE








	Servants to Cornwall.

REGAN	|  daughters to Lear.

	(Captain:)




	[Enter KENT, GLOUCESTER, and EDMUND]

	weighed, that curiosity in neither can make choice


	she grew round-wombed, and had, indeed, sir, a son
KENT	I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it
	elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account:
	whoreson must be acknowledged. Do you know this

EDMUND	My services to your lordship.
EDMUND	Sir, I shall study deserving.

KING LEAR	Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
	[Exeunt GLOUCESTER and EDMUND]
	In three our kingdom: and 'tis our fast intent
	And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
	Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
	Interest of territory, cares of state,--
	Our eldest-born, speak first.
	Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;
	Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

	We make thee lady: to thine and Albany's issue
REGAN	Sir, I am made
	Only she comes too short: that I profess
	In your dear highness' love.
	More richer than my tongue.
	No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
	Strive to be interess'd; what can you say to draw


	My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty
	Lest it may mar your fortunes.
	Return those duties back as are right fit,
	That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry



	By all the operation of the orbs
	And as a stranger to my heart and me
	Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and relieved,

	On her kind nursery. Hence, and avoid my sight!
	With my two daughters' dowers digest this third:
	That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
	I have cast off for ever: thou shalt,

	To the great love I bear you,--
	[To the Fool]
Fool	Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool
	Should sure to the slaughter,
	[Exit]
	At point a hundred knights: yes, that, on every dream,

	Let me still take away the harms I fear,
	When I have show'd the unfitness,--
		                  How now, Oswald!

	As may compact it more. Get you gone;

	You are much more attask'd for want of wisdom
	Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
ALBANY	Well, well; the event.




	Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you
KENT	I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered

KING LEAR	Ay, boy.

	for though she's as like this as a crab's like an


	what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
Fool	Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
Fool	Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
Fool	Why, to put his head in; not to give it away to his
	horses ready?


	for being old before thy time.
Fool	Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst
	Keep me in temper: I would not be mad!
	How now! are the horses ready?
KING LEAR	Come, boy.




	[Enter EDMUND, and CURAN meets him]
CURAN	And you, sir. I have been with your father, and
EDMUND	How comes that?
	ear-kissing arguments?
CURAN	Have you heard of no likely wars toward, 'twixt the


	And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
	[Enter EDGAR]
	You have now the good advantage of the night:
	Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?

	Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!








	But that I told him, the revenging gods
	Seeing how loathly opposite I stood

	By your eyes' anguish.
	In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

	And dizzy 'tis, to cast one's eyes so low!
	Methinks he seems no bigger than his head:
	Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge,
	Topple down headlong.
EDGAR	Give me your hand: you are now within a foot
GLOUCESTER	Let go my hand.
	Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
GLOUCESTER	With all my heart.

	If I could bear it longer, and not fall
	Now, fellow, fare thee well.
EDGAR	Gone, sir: farewell.
	By this, had thought been past. Alive or dead?

	So many fathom down precipitating,
	Which thou hast perpendicularly fell:


	When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage,
	Up: so. How is 't? Feel you your legs? You stand.
EDGAR	This is above all strangeness.
GLOUCESTER	A poor unfortunate beggar.
	Horns whelk'd and waved like the enridged sea:

	I took it for a man; often 'twould say

	His master thus.

	press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a
	it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well
EDGAR	Sweet marjoram.
GLOUCESTER	I know that voice.
	beard ere the black ones were there. To say 'ay'
	the thunder would not peace at my bidding; there I

KING LEAR	Ay, every inch a king:
	The wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly
	Got 'tween the lawful sheets.
	That minces virtue, and does shake the head
	Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
	There's hell, there's darkness, there's the
	good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination:

	Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?
	love. Read thou this challenge; mark but the



	Came then into my mind; and yet my mind
	They kill us for their sport.
	Angering itself and others.--Bless thee, master!




	[Enter GLOUCESTER, KING LEAR, KENT, Fool, and EDGAR]
	addition I can: I will not be long from you.

	Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.
	gentleman or a yeoman?
Fool	No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son;
KING LEAR	To have a thousand with red burning spits

KING LEAR	It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
	Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;
	Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she foxes!
	Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me,--
	Why she dares not come over to thee.
	white herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no
	Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
	[To EDGAR]
	[To the Fool]

	Sit you too.
	Thy sheep be in the corn;



	What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
EDGAR	Bless thy five wits!

KING LEAR	The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and
	Be thy mouth or black or white,
	Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,
	Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and
	about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that


	so, so, so. We'll go to supper i' he morning. So, so, so.
	[Re-enter GLOUCESTER]
KENT	Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.
	There is a litter ready; lay him in 't,
	With thine, and all that offer to defend him,

	Stand in hard cure.
	Come, help to bear thy master;

	We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
	When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
	Mark the high noises; and thyself bewray,
	Lurk, lurk.




	this letter: the army of France is landed. Seek


	beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to
	lord of Gloucester.
	How now! where's the king?
	Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;



	[Exeunt other Servants]
	Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men


CORNWALL	Bind him, I say.
REGAN	                  Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
CORNWALL	To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find--
GLOUCESTER	By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done

	With robbers' hands my hospitable favours

	Late footed in the kingdom?
GLOUCESTER	I have a letter guessingly set down,
CORNWALL	Cunning.
CORNWALL	Where hast thou sent the king?
REGAN	Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril--
GLOUCESTER	I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
GLOUCESTER	Because I would not see thy cruel nails
	In hell-black night endured, would have buoy'd up,
	Thou shouldst have said 'Good porter, turn the key,'
CORNWALL	See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
	Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods!
CORNWALL	If you see vengeance,--
	But better service have I never done you

CORNWALL	My villain!
First Servant	Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
	[Takes a sword, and runs at him behind]

	Where is thy lustre now?
	To quit this horrid act.
	That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
	Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!


	Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.
Second Servant	I'll never care what wickedness I do,
	Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain
	This coronet part betwixt you.
KENT	Royal Lear,

	The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly,
	When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom;
	Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound


	The true blank of thine eye.
KENT	                  Now, by Apollo, king,

ALBANY	|

	Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
	On thine allegiance, hear me!
	Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
	And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
	This shall not be revoked.

	That justly think'st, and hast most rightly said!
	And your large speeches may your deeds approve,

	BURGUNDY, and Attendants]
KING LEAR	My lord of Burgundy.
	Or cease your quest of love?
	Nor will you tender less.
	But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands:
	She's there, and she is yours.
KING LEAR	Will you, with those infirmities she owes,

KING LEAR	Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,

	To avert your liking a more worthier way
KING OF FRANCE	This is most strange,
	Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
	Fall'n into taint: which to believe of her,
CORDELIA	I yet beseech your majesty,--
	It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
	A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
KING LEAR	Better thou
	Which often leaves the history unspoke
	Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?
	Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
KING LEAR	Nothing: I have sworn; I am firm.


	Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
	Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:

	Thou wilt o'ertake us, hence a mile or twain,

	Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;
	Come on't what will.
GLOUCESTER	Sirrah, naked fellow,--
	[Aside]
GLOUCESTER	Come hither, fellow.
GLOUCESTER	Know'st thou the way to Dover?
	thee, good man's son, from the foul fiend! five
	mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids
	Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
	Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly;
EDGAR	Ay, master.
	Bring me but to the very brim of it,

	[Exeunt]

ACT IV
SCENE II	Before ALBANY's palace.

	[Enter OSWALD]
OSWALD	Madam, within; but never man so changed.
	And of the loyal service of his son,
	What like, offensive.
	That dares not undertake: he'll not feel wrongs
	I must change arms at home, and give the distaff
	A mistress's command. Wear this; spare speech;
	Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak,
EDMUND	Yours in the ranks of death.
	[Exit EDMUND]
	My fool usurps my body.
	[Exit]
GONERIL	I have been worth the whistle.
	Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:
	From her material sap, perforce must wither

	A father, and a gracious aged man,
	A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
	Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
	That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
	Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?
	'Alack, why does he so?'
	So horrid as in woman.
ALBANY	Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame,
	Thy flesh and bones: howe'er thou art a fiend,



	Opposed against the act, bending his sword
	Hath pluck'd him after.
	So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
	This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
	But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,





	As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
	Shows like a riotous inn: epicurism and lust
	By her, that else will take the thing she begs,
	And know themselves and you.
	Degenerate bastard! I'll not trouble thee.
	Make servants of their betters.
KING LEAR	Woe, that too late repents,--
		        O, sir, are you come?
	Than the sea-monster!
KING LEAR	[To GONERIL]  Detested kite! thou liest.
	The worships of their name. O most small fault,
	And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!

	hours at the trade.
OSWALD	This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared
	lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this
CORNWALL	Peace, sirrah!

	Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
	Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
	A plague upon your epileptic visage!


CORNWALL	Why dost thou call him a knave?  What's his offence?
CORNWALL	No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
	Than stands on any shoulder that I see
	Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
	An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
	That stretch their duties nicely.
	Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire

	accent was a plain knave; which for my part
CORNWALL	What was the offence you gave him?
	To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
	That worthied him, got praises of the king

CORNWALL	Fetch forth the stocks!
KENT	                  Sir, I am too old to learn:
	Against the grace and person of my master,
	There shall he sit till noon.
KENT	Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,

	[Stocks brought out]
	Will cheque him for 't: your purposed low correction
	That he's so slightly valued in his messenger,



	Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
	Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
GLOUCESTER	The duke's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
KENT	Good king, that must approve the common saw,
	That by thy comfortable beams I may
	Of my obscured course; and shall find time
	This shameful lodging.

	KING LEAR


EDGAR	I heard myself proclaim'd;
	Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may 'scape,
	Brought near to beast: my face I'll grime with filth;
	The country gives me proof and precedent
	And with this horrible object, from low farms,
	That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.




	And not send back my messenger.
	Of this remove.
KING LEAR	Ha!

	over-lusty at legs, then he wears wooden
	To set thee here?





	Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way
KENT	                  My lord, when at their home
	Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
	They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse;
	Whose welcome, I perceived, had poison'd mine,--
	He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
Fool	Winter's not gone yet, if the wild-geese fly that way.
	Shall see their children kind.
	for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
	Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?
KING LEAR	Follow me not;

	How chance the king comes with so small a train?

	there's no labouring i' the winter. All that follow
	runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with
	would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
