
REGAN	                  That's as we list to grace him.
OSWALD	Well, madam.
	That I may speak: I'll write straight to my sister,


SCENE IV	A hall in the same.
KENT	If but as well I other accents borrow,
	So may it come, thy master, whom thou lovest,
	Holla the other.

ACT III

	You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
	Smite flat the thick rotundity o' the world!
	house is better than this rain-water out o' door.
	Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters:
	A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man:

	[Re-enter KING LEAR]
ALBANY	What's the matter, sir?
	[To GONERIL]
	Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
	Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
	A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
	Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
	[Exit]
	But let his disposition have that scope

	Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.

REGAN	Out, treacherous villain!
GLOUCESTER	O my follies! then Edgar was abused.

CORNWALL	I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.
	[Exit CORNWALL, led by REGAN]
Third Servant	If she live long,
	To lead him where he would: his roguish madness




	The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
	The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
	My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
	Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
	From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
GLOUCESTER	I serve you, madam:


SCENE II	Before Gloucester's castle.
OSWALD	Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?

KENT	I love thee not.
	care for me.

	hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a
	the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pandar,
OSWALD	Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail
	thy heels, and beat thee before the king? Draw, you
	For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
	We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage:
	Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too,
	That ebb and flow by the moon.
	The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
	first. Come.
	Take thou this note;
	One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost
	Will not bear question; either say thou'lt do 't,
EDMUND	About it; and write happy when thou hast done.
	If it be man's work, I'll do 't.
	Captain, and Soldiers]
	His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us

GONERIL	Put on what weary negligence you please,
	That still would manage those authorities

EDGAR	Ay, two hours together.
EDGAR	None at all.
	his displeasure; which at this instant so rageth

	hear my lord speak: pray ye, go; there's my key:
EDMUND	Brother, I advise you to the best; go armed: I

	[Exit EDGAR]
	My practises ride easy! I see the business.




GONERIL	By day and night he wrongs me; every hour
	And let the wise man fly:

KING LEAR	Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
GLOUCESTER	My dear lord,
KING LEAR	Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!

KING LEAR	The king would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
	Infirmity doth still neglect all office
	To take the indisposed and sickly fit
	Should he sit here? This act persuades me
	Or at their chamber-door I'll beat the drum
	Election makes not up on such conditions.
	[To KING OF FRANCE]
	To avert your liking a more worthier way
	That she, that even but now was your best object,
	Must be of such unnatural degree,

	It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,

EDGAR	What kind of help?


	Now marry in an instant.
	This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,
	[Enter KENT]

ALBANY	                  Great thing of us forgot!

	And after slew herself.
	Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,
ALBANY	                  Run, run, O, run!
EDMUND	Well thought on: take my sword,
	[Exit EDGAR]
	That she fordid herself.

	Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
	Why, then she lives.

	That ever I have felt.

	Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
Captain	'Tis true, my lords, he did.
	And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?




	And desperately are dead.
	That we present us to him.

	What comfort to this great decay may come
	[To EDGAR and KENT]
	The wages of their virtue, and all foes
	And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,

KENT	Break, heart; I prithee, break!
	That would upon the rack of this tough world
KENT	The wonder is, he hath endured so long:


	Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
	That you must lose a husband.

	May equally determine.
	Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
	To-morrow, or at further space, to appear
		    O, are you free?
	[Points to his heart]
REGAN	I pray you, sir, take patience: I have hope.

	As clears her from all blame.
	Nature in you stands on the very verge
	Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
	Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
	To be such men as may besort your age,
	Degenerate bastard! I'll not trouble thee.

	[To ALBANY]
	More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
KING LEAR	[To GONERIL]  Detested kite! thou liest.
	How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!

ALBANY	My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
	Hath lost me in your liking.
KING OF FRANCE	Is it but this,--a tardiness in nature
	Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?
	And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
	Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:
	That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling

	Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum:


SCENE VII	A tent in the French camp. LEAR on a bed asleep,

KENT	To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid.
	These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
	My boon I make it, that you know me not
	[To the Doctor]


	I' the sway of your own will. Is he array'd?
Doctor	Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;
Doctor	Please you, draw near. Louder the music there!
	Have in thy reverence made!
	Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face
	With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
	'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
CORDELIA	How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?
	Do scald like moulten lead.

KING LEAR	Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
	Of my condition!

	I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
	Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;

	You have some cause, they have not.

Doctor	Be comforted, good madam: the great rage,


KENT	Most certain, sir.

	powers of the kingdom approach apace.
	[Exit]
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN,
	To change the course: he's full of alteration
REGAN	Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
	You know the goodness I intend upon you:



	She and the duke her husband!
	Should loosen him and me.
	Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,

	Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
GLOUCESTER	I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
	Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
EDGAR	[Aside]  O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at
	Of her confine: you should be ruled and led

	[Kneeling]
REGAN	Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks:
	Look'd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,

	You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,

	To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
	Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;

CORNWALL	What trumpet's that?
	[Enter OSWALD]
	Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
KING LEAR	Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope
	If you do love old men, if your sweet sway

	All's not offence that indiscretion finds


	I am now from home, and out of that provision
	To wage against the enmity o' the air;
	To knee his throne, and, squire-like; pension beg
	[Pointing at OSWALD]
	I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
	A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle,
	Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:
	I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided

	Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
GONERIL	Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
	For now I spy a danger,--I entreat you

	With such a number. What, must I come to you
KING LEAR	Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd,

GONERIL	Hear me, my lord;
REGAN	What need one?
	Man's life's as cheap as beast's: thou art a lady;
	You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
	And let not women's weapons, water-drops,
	for him, that he hath wrote this to feel my


GLOUCESTER	To his father, that so tenderly and entirely

	no good to us: though the wisdom of nature can
	palaces, treason; and the bond cracked 'twixt son
	machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
	offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.
	when we are sick in fortune,--often the surfeit
	treachers, by spherical predominance; drunkards,
	disposition to the charge of a star! My
	had the maidenliest star in the firmament
	And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old
EDGAR	How now, brother Edmund! what serious

	and the parent; death, dearth, dissolutions of

	Rive your concealing continents, and cry
	Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
	Denied me to come in--return, and force
	I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
	That's sorry yet for thee.
	With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,--

	When priests are more in word than matter;
	No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
	Then shall the realm of Albion




	pity him, they took from me the use of mine own
EDMUND	Most savage and unnatural!
	spoken; I have locked the letter in my closet:
	the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived:

	This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me




	[Storm still]

KING LEAR	Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
	Thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth. When the
	Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
	Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,--

	[To the Fool]
	[Fool goes in]
	Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you
	And show the heavens more just.



	Hum! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
EDGAR	Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the foul
	proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting-horse over
	charity, whom the foul fiend vexes: there could I
KING LEAR	What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
KING LEAR	Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air
GLOUCESTER	I would have all well betwixt you.

	kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

REGAN	I am glad to see your highness.
	Sepulchring an adultress.
	I have full cause of weeping; but this heart

REGAN	This house is little: the old man and his people

	Where is my lord of Gloucester?

GLOUCESTER	He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.

REGAN	O, sir, to wilful men,
	To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
	[Exeunt]



KENT	I know you. Where's the king?
	That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
	This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
KENT	But who is with him?
KENT	Sir, I do know you;
	Who have--as who have not, that their great stars
	Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
	Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
	Some that will thank you, making just report
	This office to you.
	For confirmation that I am much more
	That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!




	state, which since his coming forth is thought
KENT	Who hath he left behind him general?
	demonstration of grief?
	Over her passion; who, most rebel-like,
Gentleman	Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove
	What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence,
KENT	Made she no verbal question?
	Kent! father! sisters! What, i' the storm? i' the night?


Gentleman	No, since.
	Will yield to see his daughter.
	That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her

Gentleman	'Tis so, they are afoot.
	When I am known aright, you shall not grieve


SCENE IV	The same. A tent.
CORDELIA	Alack, 'tis he: why, he was met even now
	In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;
	Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
	So long as we can say  'This is the worst.'

	Which made me think a man a worm: my son
	They kill us for their sport.

Old Man	Ay, my lord.
	And bring some covering for this naked soul,
GLOUCESTER	'Tis the times' plague, when madmen lead the blind.
	Come on't what will.

	I cannot daub it further.

	thee, good man's son, from the foul fiend! five
	and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master!
	Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,

	Bring me but to the very brim of it,
EDGAR	Give me thy arm:


SCENE II	Before ALBANY's palace.
GONERIL	Welcome, my lord: I marvel our mild husband
		 Now, where's your master'?
	His answer was 'The worse:' of Gloucester's treachery,
	What like, offensive.
	Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
	Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear,

EDMUND	Yours in the ranks of death.

OSWALD	Madam, here comes my lord.

	Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:
	And come to deadly use.
	Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
	Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
	Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
	Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
	With plumed helm thy slayer begins threats;
	Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
ALBANY	Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame,
	A woman's shape doth shield thee.

	The other eye of Gloucester.
	Opposed against the act, bending his sword


GONERIL	[Aside]              One way I like this well;

Messenger	Come with my lady hither.

	Might have the freer course.
	The cod-piece that will house
	What he his heart should make



	Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
KING LEAR	Let the great gods,
	Thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue

	Are not the question here.
EDMUND	I shall attend you presently at your tent.

	[As they are going out, enter EDGAR disguised]
ALBANY	                  I'll overtake you. Speak.
	If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
	And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
	When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
	[Exit EDGAR]
	Here is the guess of their true strength and forces

	Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
	Her husband being alive. Now then we'll use
	The battle done, and they within our power,



	KING LEAR, CORDELIA, and Soldiers, over the stage;
EDGAR	Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
GLOUCESTER	Grace go with you, sir!

GLOUCESTER	No farther, sir; a man may rot even here.



SCENE III	The British camp near Dover.
	Soldiers, &c]
	I have cast off for ever: thou shalt,
GONERIL	Do you mark that, my lord?
GONERIL	Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho!

	Should sure to the slaughter,

	He may enguard his dotage with their powers,
GONERIL	Safer than trust too far:
	When I have show'd the unfitness,--
	What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
	Inform her full of my particular fear;
	[Exit OSWALD]
	You are much more attask'd for want of wisdom

	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool]
	If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.
	[Exit]
KING LEAR	Ay, boy.
KING LEAR	Ha, ha, ha!

	the middle on's face?
	what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.

KING LEAR	Why?
KING LEAR	I will forget my nature. So kind a father! Be my

KING LEAR	To take 't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
KING LEAR	How's that?
KING LEAR	O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven
	How now! are the horses ready?





	his duchess will be here with him this night.
	I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but
CURAN	Have you heard of no likely wars toward, 'twixt the
CURAN	You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.
	This weaves itself perforce into my business.

	You have now the good advantage of the night:
	Advise yourself.
	In cunning I must draw my sword upon you
	[Exit EDGAR]

	[Enter GLOUCESTER, and Servants with torches]
	Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
EDMUND	Look, sir, I bleed.

		     By no means what?
	Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond
	And bring him to our eye.
	In the restoring his bereaved sense?
	The which he lacks; that to provoke in him,
	All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,


	My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter REGAN and OSWALD]


REGAN	What might import my sister's letter to him?
	It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
	The strength o' the enemy.
	The ways are dangerous.
REGAN	Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
OSWALD	Madam, I had rather--
	To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
	Therefore I do advise you, take this note:
	And when your mistress hears thus much from you,





EDGAR	You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.
	Hark, do you hear the sea?
	Of this remove.
	Makest thou this shame thy pastime?
	by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by
KING LEAR	What's he that hath so much thy place mistook

KING LEAR	No, I say.

KENT	By Juno, I swear, ay.
	Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way
	I did commend your highness' letters to them,
	Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
	And meeting here the other messenger,
	He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
	Fathers that wear rags
	Ne'er turns the key to the poor.
	Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow,
KING LEAR	Follow me not;
Gentleman	Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
Fool	And thou hadst been set i' the stocks for that
Fool	We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee
	runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with
	That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
	To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.



	my mistress' heart, and did the act of darkness with
	out-paramoured the Turk: false of heart, light of
	out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen

	Is man no more than this? Consider him well. Thou
	forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings!
Fool	Prithee, nuncle, be contented; 'tis a naughty night
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, with a torch]
	hare-lip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the
	And her troth plight,
KING LEAR	What's he?

	the ditch-dog; drinks the green mantle of the
	But mice and rats, and such small deer,

KING LEAR	What dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?
	and says little; to fear judgment; to fight when I
KENT	A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
KENT	Service.


KING LEAR	What services canst thou do?
	qualified in; and the best of me is diligence.
	so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years
	Dinner, ho, dinner! Where's my knave? my fool?
	[Enter OSWALD]

	[Exit a Knight]

KING LEAR	Why came not the slave back to me when I called him.
KING LEAR	He would not!
	great abatement of kindness appears as well in the

KING LEAR	Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception: I
	have not seen him this two days.
KING LEAR	No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you, and
	Go you, call hither my fool.



OSWALD	I'll not be struck, my lord.

	away, away! if you will measure your lubber's


	[Offering KENT his cap]

	thou'lt catch cold shortly: there, take my coxcomb:



KING LEAR	Do.
	Lend less than thou owest,
	And keep in-a-door,

KING LEAR	Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of nothing.
KING LEAR	A bitter fool!
KING LEAR	No, lad; teach me.
	Do thou for him stand:


	and ladies too, they will not let me have all fool

	the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown,
	[Singing]
	Thou losest here, a better where to find.
	Without our grace, our love, our benison.

	And like a sister am most loath to call
	So, farewell to you both.
	Be to content your lord, who hath received you
	Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
	[Exeunt KING OF FRANCE and CORDELIA]

	little: he always loved our sister most; and
	but slenderly known himself.
	condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness

	surrender of his will but offend us.




	Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
	My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
	Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
	As to the legitimate: fine word,--legitimate!

	Confined to exhibition! All this done
	[Putting up the letter]

GLOUCESTER	No? What needed, then, that terrible dispatch of
EDMUND	I beseech you, sir, pardon me: it is a letter
GLOUCESTER	Give me the letter, sir.
GLOUCESTER	Let's see, let's see.
GLOUCESTER	[Reads]  'This policy and reverence of age makes
	as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to

	brought it?

	fain think it were not.
	not in the contents.
	maintain it to be fit, that, sons at perfect age,
	letter! Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested,
EDMUND	I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please
	him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great

	royalty of her father: draw, you rogue, or I'll so
KENT	Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat
OSWALD	Help, ho! murder! murder!
EDMUND	How now! What's the matter?
GLOUCESTER	Weapons! arms! What 's the matter here?
REGAN	The messengers from our sister and the king.

CORNWALL	Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter GLOUCESTER, KING LEAR, KENT, Fool, and EDGAR]


Fool	Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a
Fool	No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son;
	Come hissing in upon 'em,--
	horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.

	Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she foxes!

EDGAR	The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a
KENT	How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed:
	[To EDGAR]


	Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?

Fool	Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?



	Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.
	Mastiff, grey-hound, mongrel grim,
	Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
	about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that
	You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only I


KENT	Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.
	And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
	And follow me, that will to some provision
	Which, if convenience will not allow,
	Come, help to bear thy master;
	[Exeunt all but EDGAR]
	Leaving free things and happy shows behind:
	He childed as I father'd! Tom, away!
	Lurk, lurk.

ACT III

	this letter: the army of France is landed. Seek
REGAN	Hang him instantly.
	sister company: the revenges we are bound to take
	betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my
	How now! where's the king?
	Who, with some other of the lords dependants,

	[Exeunt GONERIL, EDMUND, and OSWALD]



	Witness the world, that I create thee here
ALBANY	The let-alone lies not in your good will.

	This gilded serpent
	I bar it in the interest of my wife:

	Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
	I'll prove it on thy heart,

	[Throwing down a glove]
	On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
EDMUND	                  A herald, ho, a herald!

	[Exit Regan, led]
	And read out this.

	trumpet: he is bold in his defence.'

Herald	Again!

	Upon this call o' the trumpet.


EDMUND	Himself: what say'st thou to him?
	Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
	False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
	This sword, this arm, and my best spirits, are bent
	But, since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
	With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
	[Alarums. They fight. EDMUND falls]
	By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
	Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir:

	Know'st thou this paper?

	'Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
	I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
	The dark and vicious place where thee he got



	That we the pain of death would hourly die
	Their precious stones new lost: became his guide,
	I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last

ALBANY	If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
	To such as love not sorrow; but another,
	Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
	That ever ear received: which in recounting
ALBANY	But who was this?
	They know not how their wits to wear,
Fool	I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy



	kind o' thing than a fool: and yet I would not be
	[Enter GONERIL]
Fool	Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to
	[To GONERIL]
	Weary of all, shall want some.

	I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
	Would not 'scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,


	Whereof I know you are fraught; and put away
	draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I love thee.
	Are lethargied--Ha! waking? 'tis not so.
KING LEAR	I would learn that; for, by the

	To understand my purposes aright:
	Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
	Though well we may not pass upon his life
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, brought in by two or three]


GLOUCESTER	Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.


	You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?


CORNWALL	Cunning.

CORNWALL	Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.

	In hell-black night endured, would have buoy'd up,
	All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see


	But better service have I never done you
First Servant	If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
	[They draw and fight]


	KING LEAR

DUKE OF BURGUNDY	(BURGUNDY:)

EDGAR	son to Gloucester.

Fool:

	(First Servant:)
GONERIL	|

	(Captain:)
SCENE	Britain.
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KENT, GLOUCESTER, and EDMUND]
GLOUCESTER	It did always seem so to us: but now, in the

	brazed to it.
	she grew round-wombed, and had, indeed, sir, a son
	being so proper.
	world before he was sent for, yet was his mother
EDMUND	No, my lord.
EDMUND	My services to your lordship.

	GONERIL, REGAN, CORDELIA, and Attendants]

	In three our kingdom: and 'tis our fast intent
	We have this hour a constant will to publish
	And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters,--
	Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
	Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;

	With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,

	Only she comes too short: that I profess

KING LEAR	To thee and thine hereditary ever
	The vines of France and milk of Burgundy

KING LEAR	Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.

	You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I
	That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
KING LEAR	But goes thy heart with this?

	The mysteries of Hecate, and the night;
	And as a stranger to my heart and me
	As thou my sometime daughter.
	Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
	Call Burgundy. Cornwall and Albany,
	That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
	The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,


	When Lear is mad. What wilt thou do, old man?
	This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgment,
KING LEAR	Kent, on thy life, no more.





	I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
	Which we durst never yet, and with strain'd pride
	To shield thee from diseases of the world;
	This shall not be revoked.
	[To CORDELIA]
	[To REGAN and GONERIL]
	He'll shape his old course in a country new.
	BURGUNDY, and Attendants]
	We first address towards you, who with this king
BURGUNDY	Most royal majesty,
	When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
	She's there, and she is yours.
	Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
EDGAR	The prince of darkness is a gentleman:

	Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
KING LEAR	First let me talk with this philosopher.
KING LEAR	I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
KING LEAR	Let me ask you one word in private.
GLOUCESTER	Canst thou blame him?
	He said it would be thus, poor banish'd man!
	No father his son dearer: truth to tell thee,
	Noble philosopher, your company.

KING LEAR	With him;
GLOUCESTER	Take him you on.

	I smell the blood of a British man.

ACT III


CORNWALL	I now perceive, it was not altogether your
EDMUND	How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to


EDMUND	[Aside]  If I find him comforting the king, it will
CORNWALL	I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a
	With his prepared sword, he charges home
	Full suddenly he fled.
	My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night:

	If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
	To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:


	May have the due note of him; and of my land,

	Which can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord?
	He whom my father named? your Edgar?
	That tend upon my father?

	Been well inform'd of them; and with such cautions,
	Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
GLOUCESTER	He did bewray his practise; and received
GLOUCESTER	                  Ay, my good lord.
	Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
EDMUND	I shall serve you, sir,
CORNWALL	You know not why we came to visit you,--
	By your eyes' anguish.


	Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!
	Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge,

	Would I not leap upright.
	Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off;
GLOUCESTER	With all my heart.
GLOUCESTER	[Kneeling]  O you mighty gods!
	My snuff and loathed part of nature should

	By this, had thought been past. Alive or dead?
GLOUCESTER	                  Away, and let me die.
	Hast heavy substance; bleed'st not; speak'st; art sound.
GLOUCESTER	But have I fall'n, or no?

	And frustrate his proud will.
GLOUCESTER	Too well, too well.

	Horns whelk'd and waved like the enridged sea:
GLOUCESTER	I do remember now: henceforth I'll bear

	The safer sense will ne'er accommodate

	crow-keeper: draw me a clothier's yard. Look,
	Give the word.

	beard ere the black ones were there. To say 'ay'
	found 'em, there I smelt 'em out. Go to, they are
	Is 't not the king?
	Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:
	Got 'tween the lawful sheets.
	To hear of pleasure's name;
	But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
	fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet,



KING LEAR	Read.
	head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in

	is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen
KING LEAR	And the creature run from the cur? There thou
	Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind
	Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.
	To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:
KING LEAR	If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.

	It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe
	[Enter a Gentleman, with Attendants]
KING LEAR	No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
Gentleman	You shall have any thing.
	Ay, and laying autumn's dust.
	I will be jovial: come, come; I am a king,
KING LEAR	Then there's life in't. Nay, if you get it, you
Gentleman	A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
EDGAR	Hail, gentle sir.

	How near's the other army?
EDGAR	I thank you, sir: that's all.
EDGAR	I thank you, sir.
	Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
GLOUCESTER	Now, good sir, what are you?
	I'll lead you to some biding.

	To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
	Put strength enough to't.
	Darest thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence;

	'twould not ha' bin zo long as 'tis by a vortnight.
OSWALD	Out, dunghill!
	[They fight, and EDGAR knocks him down]
	To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out
EDGAR	I know thee well: a serviceable villain;

	Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not:

	then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal; from
		'GONERIL.'
	Of murderous lechers: and in the mature time
GLOUCESTER	The king is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,




	Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain
	With every gale and vary of their masters,
	I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.


KENT	Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain:
CORNWALL	This is some fellow,
	An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.


	flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain
CORNWALL	What was the offence you gave him?
	When he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure,
	And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,

KENT	                  Sir, I am too old to learn:
	Stocking his messenger.
REGAN	Till noon! till night, my lord; and all night too.
REGAN	Sir, being his knave, I will.
	[Stocks brought out]
	Is such as basest and contemned'st wretches

	For following her affairs. Put in his legs.

	Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd: I'll entreat for thee.
	Give you good morrow!

	That by thy comfortable beams I may
	From this enormous state, seeking to give




	Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place,
	That ever penury, in contempt of man,
	The country gives me proof and precedent
	Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter KING LEAR, Fool, and Gentleman]
