	And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed
ALBANY	Sir, by your patience,
	Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,

	To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.

ACT I

	That can my speech defuse, my good intent
	Shall find thee full of labours.





	Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!
	Crack nature's moulds, an germens spill at once,
	Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters' blessing:
	I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;
	But yet I call you servile ministers,
Fool	He that has a house to put's head in has a good



	Of what hath moved you.
	To make this creature fruitful!
	Create her child of spleen; that it may live,
	To laughter and contempt; that she may feel

	Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers;
GONERIL	Not so hot:
	Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
GLOUCESTER	All dark and comfortless. Where's my son Edmund?
	Thou call'st on him that hates thee: it was he
	Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
	[Exit one with GLOUCESTER]
	Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave

	And in the end meet the old course of death,
	Allows itself to any thing.
	[Exeunt severally]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter EDGAR]
	Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
	Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?
	But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
	Wherein we must have use of your advice:
	Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow
	Your graces are right welcome.

ACT II


KENT	I' the mire.


OSWALD	What dost thou know me for?
	lily-livered, action-taking knave, a whoreson,
	and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch: one whom I
	on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
	rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon
	Myself could else out-frown false fortune's frown.
	When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down,
	Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out;

	He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,


	As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
	Or thrive by other means.
	Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so


	On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
OSWALD	He's coming, madam; I hear him.
	You and your fellows; I'll have it come to question:
	That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
EDGAR	Why, the night gone by.


	in him, that with the mischief of your person it
EDMUND	That's my fear. I pray you, have a continent
	if you do stir abroad, go armed.
	am no honest man if there be any good meaning
EDGAR	Shall I hear from you anon?

	Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit:


SCENE III	The Duke of Albany's palace.
GONERIL	Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
	The knave turns fool that runs away;
Fool	Not i' the stocks, fool.
	They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches;
	You know the fiery quality of the duke;
	Fiery? what quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
KING LEAR	Inform'd them! Dost thou understand me, man?
	Would with his daughter speak, commands her service:
	Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves
	For the sound man. Death on my state! wherefore
	That this remotion of the duke and her


	Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed
	The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
	That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection
CORDELIA	I yet beseech your majesty,--
	No unchaste action, or dishonour'd step,
	[Enter a Gentleman, with a bloody knife]

Gentleman	'Tis hot, it smokes;
Gentleman	Your lady, sir, your lady: and her sister

	Touches us not with pity.

KENT	I am come
	Speak, Edmund, where's the king? and where's Cordelia?
KENT	Alack, why thus?

	Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ

	Give it the captain.


	[Re-enter KING LEAR, with CORDELIA dead in his arms;
	That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever!

ALBANY	Fall, and cease!

EDGAR	'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
	What is't thou say'st? Her voice was ever soft,

	Mine eyes are not o' the best: I'll tell you straight.
KING LEAR	This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
KING LEAR	He's a good fellow, I can tell you that;
KING LEAR	I'll see that straight.
KING LEAR	You are welcome hither.


Captain	Edmund is dead, my lord.
	Shall be applied: for us we will resign,

	The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
	Never, never, never, never, never!
	[Dies]

	Stretch him out longer.
	He but usurp'd his life.
	[To KENT and EDGAR]
KENT	I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
	The oldest hath borne most: we that are young


KING OF FRANCE	Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
	And fortune led you well: you have the captives

	To pluck the common bosom on his side,
	Where you shall hold your session. At this time
	Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,

	You less know how to value her desert
REGAN	I cannot think my sister in the least

	Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd and bold,
	For instant remedy: be then desired
	And know themselves and you.
	Yet have I left a daughter.
	[Enter ALBANY]

	Than the sea-monster!
	My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
	That, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
	[Striking his head]

	Which often leaves the history unspoke
	She is herself a dowry.
	Duchess of Burgundy.
	Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:
EDGAR	Give me your hand:
	Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.

ACT IV
	soft music playing; Gentleman, and others attending.
CORDELIA	O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work,
	All my reports go with the modest truth;
	I prithee, put them off.
	Till time and I think meet.

CORDELIA	O you kind gods,
Doctor	So please your majesty

	I doubt not of his temperance.


	To be opposed against the warring winds?
	Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
	Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.


CORDELIA	Still, still, far wide!
	I am mightily abused. I should e'en die with pity,

KING LEAR	Pray, do not mock me:
	Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
	For, as I am a man, I think this lady
KING LEAR	Be your tears wet? yes, 'faith. I pray, weep not:

KENT	                  In your own kingdom, sir.
	You see, is kill'd in him: and yet it is danger
CORDELIA	Will't please your highness walk?
	[Exeunt all but KENT and Gentleman]

Gentleman	They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl





	Gentlemen, and Soldiers.
	And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.

	Tell me--but truly--but then speak the truth,
REGAN	But have you never found my brother's way
REGAN	I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
REGAN	I never shall endure her: dear my lord,


	I never yet was valiant: for this business,
Old Man	O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and
	Thee they may hurt.
	I stumbled when I saw: full oft 'tis seen,
	I'ld say I had eyes again!
	the worst'?
	By some discretion, that discerns your state
KING LEAR	Ask her forgiveness?

	Return you to my sister.
	Most serpent-like, upon the very heart:
CORNWALL	Fie, sir, fie!
	To fall and blast her pride!
KING LEAR	No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse:
	To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
	Thy half o' the kingdom hast thou not forgot,
KING LEAR	Who put my man i' the stocks?


	Out, varlet, from my sight!
	Thou didst not know on't. Who comes here? O heavens,
	Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,
	Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
	And dotage terms so.
CORNWALL	I set him there, sir: but his own disorders
REGAN	I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
	Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
	To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,--
	To keep base life afoot. Return with her?

	We'll no more meet, no more see one another:
	In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee;
	I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
	For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
KING LEAR	Is this well spoken?
	Speak 'gainst so great a number? How, in one house,
	From those that she calls servants or from mine?
	To bring but five and twenty: to no more
REGAN	                  And in good time you gave it.
	With five and twenty, Regan? said you so?
	When others are more wicked: not being the worst
		         I'll go with thee:
	What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,

	If only to go warm were gorgeous,
	As full of grief as age; wretched in both!
	Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,
	affection to your honour, and to no further
EDMUND	If your honour judge it meet, I will place you
GLOUCESTER	He cannot be such a monster--
	loves him. Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him
EDMUND	I will seek him, sir, presently: convey the
	reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself
	and father. This villain of mine comes under the
	ruinous disorders, follow us disquietly to our

	of our own behavior,--we make guilty of our
	liars, and adulterers, by an enforced obedience of
	father compounded with my mother under the
	twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar--
	comedy: my cue is villanous melancholy, with a
	contemplation are you in?
EDGAR	Do you busy yourself about that?
	ancient amities; divisions in state, menaces and
EDGAR	How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
	These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
	Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest:
	Their scanted courtesy.
	The art of our necessities is strange,

	Must make content with his fortunes fit,
	[Exeunt KING LEAR and KENT]
	When brewers mar their malt with water;
	When slanders do not live in tongues;
	Come to great confusion:
	[Exit]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter GLOUCESTER and EDMUND]
	house; charged me, on pain of their perpetual

	these injuries the king now bears will be revenged
	if he ask for me. I am ill, and gone to bed.
	[Exit]
	That which my father loses; no less than all:


SCENE IV	The heath. Before a hovel.
KENT	Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:

KING LEAR	Wilt break my heart?
	Invades us to the skin: so 'tis to thee;
	mind's free,
	For lifting food to't? But I will punish home:
	O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
KING LEAR	Prithee, go in thyself: seek thine own ease:


	From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en

Fool	Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit
Fool	A spirit, a spirit: he says his name's poor Tom.
	[Enter EDGAR disguised as a mad man]

	fiend hath led through fire and through flame, and
	four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a
	have him now,--and there,--and there again, and there.
	Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all?
	Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!

Fool	Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels

CORNWALL	Hail to your grace!

	Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,
	[Storm and tempest]
	Cannot be well bestow'd.
REGAN	For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,

GLOUCESTER	The king is in high rage.

GLOUCESTER	Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
	The injuries that they themselves procure



SCENE I	A heath.
KENT	Who's there, besides foul weather?

	Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
	The lion and the belly-pinched wolf

	And dare, upon the warrant of my note,
	Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,
	Against the old kind king; or something deeper,
	In some of our best ports, and are at point
	Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow

	Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take
	I will go seek the king.
	And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:


SCENE III	The French camp near Dover.
KENT	Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back
	of; which imports to the kingdom so much


	Sought to be king o'er her.
	Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
	As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief,

	Let pity not be believed!' There she shook
KENT	It is the stars,
Gentleman	No.


	To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
Gentleman	Alack, poor gentleman!

	Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go

ACT IV

	As mad as the vex'd sea; singing aloud;
	Search every acre in the high-grown field,
	Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,


Old Man	Madman and beggar too.
	Came then into my mind; and yet my mind

GLOUCESTER	Is that the naked fellow?

	Who I'll entreat to lead me.
	Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;

EDGAR	Poor Tom's a-cold.

GLOUCESTER	Know'st thou the way to Dover?
	fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of lust, as

	That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
EDGAR	Ay, master.
	And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
	Poor Tom shall lead thee.

ACT IV

	Not met us on the way.

	And of the loyal service of his son,

	May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;
	If you dare venture in your own behalf,
	Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak,

	O, the difference of man and man!

GONERIL	I have been worth the whistle.
	That nature, which contemns its origin,

	Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
	A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
	Like monsters of the deep.
	Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st
	Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still, and criest
	So horrid as in woman.
	Be-monster not thy feature. Were't my fitness

ALBANY	What news?

	To his great master; who, thereat enraged,
ALBANY	This shows you are above,
Messenger	Both, both, my lord.
	But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
	[Exit]

ALBANY	Knows he the wickedness?

	Before the head has any,
	Shall of a corn cry woe,
KING LEAR	No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
KENT	Who's there?
KENT	Alas, sir, are you here? things that love night
	Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
	That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads,
	Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,
REGAN	Why is this reason'd?


REGAN	'Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.


	For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,

	And I'll appear again.

	By diligent discovery; but your haste
	[Exit]
	Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
	His countenance for the battle; which being done,
	Shall never see his pardon; for my state


SCENE II	A field between the two camps.
	and exeunt]
	For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:

EDGAR	Away, old man; give me thy hand; away!

GLOUCESTER	And that's true too.

ACT V


	I warrant thee.


Fool	Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool
	If my cap would buy a halter:
GONERIL	This man hath had good counsel:--a hundred knights!
	And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say!
	Let me still take away the harms I fear,


	And thereto add such reasons of your own

	Than praised for harmful mildness.
GONERIL	Nay, then--








KING LEAR	Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?


KING LEAR	No.

	horses ready?
KING LEAR	Because they are not eight?


	Keep me in temper: I would not be mad!

Fool	She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure,


SCENE I	GLOUCESTER's castle.
EDMUND	Save thee, Curan.

	ear-kissing arguments?
	Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?

	My father hath set guard to take my brother;
	[Enter EDGAR]
	Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?

	Draw; seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.

	Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards

	To stand auspicious mistress,--

GLOUCESTER	Pursue him, ho! Go after.

	The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,

	He that helps him take all my outward worth.
	Are many simples operative, whose power
	Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
	[Enter a Messenger]
CORDELIA	'Tis known before; our preparation stands
	No blown ambition doth our arms incite,




REGAN	Himself in person there?
REGAN	Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?

	To let him live: where he arrives he moves


	Transport her purposes by word? Belike,


	My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd;
	I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.
OSWALD	Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter GLOUCESTER, and EDGAR dressed like a peasant]

	And not send back my messenger.


	the loins, and men by the legs: when a man's
	To set thee here?
KING LEAR	No.

KENT	Yes, they have.

	Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,
	Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
	Which presently they read: on whose contents,
	Whose welcome, I perceived, had poison'd mine,--
	Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
	Do make their children blind;
	But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours
	Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?
	Stay here.

	question, thou hadst well deserved it.
	there's no labouring i' the winter. All that follow
	following it: but the great one that goes up the
	And follows but for form,

	Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers
EDGAR	Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill:
EDGAR	Take heed o' the foul fiend: obey thy parents;
KING LEAR	What hast thou been?
	her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and
	ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,
	from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.
	[Storm still]
	owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep
	come unbutton here.
	to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were

	poor creature of earth.
	And, aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

EDGAR	Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad,
	standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to
	Have been Tom's food for seven long year.

	How now! what art thou?

	cannot choose; and to eat no fish.


KING LEAR	Dost thou know me, fellow?
KING LEAR	What's that?


	on my back forty eight.
	Go you, and call my fool hither.

	[Exit]

	How now! where's that mongrel?


	general dependants as in the duke himself also and
Knight	I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken;
	have perceived a most faint neglect of late; which I

	tell my daughter I would speak with her.

	O, you sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I,
KING LEAR	'My lady's father'! my lord's knave: your
KING LEAR	Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?

KING LEAR	I thank thee, fellow; thou servest me, and I'll
	length again, tarry: but away! go to; have you
KING LEAR	Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there's
	[Enter Fool]

KENT	Why, fool?
	why, this fellow has banished two on's daughters,
KING LEAR	Why, my boy?
KING LEAR	Take heed, sirrah; the whip.
KING LEAR	A pestilent gall to me!

	Ride more than thou goest,
	And thou shalt have more
Fool	Then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer; you



	The sweet and bitter fool
KING LEAR	Dost thou call me fool, boy?
KENT	This is not altogether fool, my lord.
	to myself; they'll be snatching. Give me an egg,
Fool	Why, after I have cut the egg i' the middle, and eat
	when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak

	Come, noble Burgundy.
KING OF FRANCE	Bid farewell to your sisters.
	Your faults as they are named. Use well our father:

	At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
	Well may you prosper!

REGAN	That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
	with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off

	that infirm and choleric years bring with them.
GONERIL	There is further compliment of leavetaking

	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter EDMUND, with a letter]
	The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
	As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
	Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops,
	Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
	[Enter GLOUCESTER]
	Upon the gad! Edmund, how now! what news?

GLOUCESTER	What paper were you reading?
	it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath
	from my brother, that I have not all o'er-read;


	the world bitter to the best of our times; keeps
	me, that of this I may speak more. If our father
	Hum--conspiracy!--'Sleep till I waked him,--you

GLOUCESTER	You know the character to be your brother's?


	and fathers declining, the father should be as
	brutish villain! worse than brutish! Go, sirrah,
	you to suspend your indignation against my
	gap in your own honour, and shake in pieces the
	shines; I'll make a sop o' the moonshine of you:
OSWALD	Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
	carbonado your shanks: draw, you rascal; come your ways.
	slave, strike.




KENT	No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour. You





KENT	All the power of his wits have given way to his
EDGAR	Frateretto calls me; and tells me
	gentleman or a yeoman?
	for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman


	Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;

Fool	   Her boat hath a leak,
	nightingale. Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two
	Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?

	And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,
	you are o' the commission,
	Thy sheep be in the corn;
KING LEAR	Arraign her first; 'tis Goneril. I here take my

KING LEAR	And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
EDGAR	Bless thy five wits!
EDGAR	[Aside]  My tears begin to take his part so much,

	Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
	Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and
	makes these hard hearts?
	do not like the fashion of your garments: you will
KING LEAR	Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains:
	[Re-enter GLOUCESTER]

	Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master:
	Give thee quick conduct.
	Stand in hard cure.
	Thou must not stay behind.

	But then the mind much sufferance doth o'er skip,
	Mark the high noises; and thyself bewray,




	out the villain Gloucester.

	upon your traitorous father are not fit for your
	lord of Gloucester.

	Are gone with him towards Dover; where they boast
GONERIL	Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
REGAN	In my rights,
REGAN	Jesters do oft prove prophets.
REGAN	Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
	My lord and master.

REGAN	[To EDMUND]  Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.

	'Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
GONERIL	An interlude!
	There is my pledge;
	Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
GONERIL	[Aside]  If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.

	My truth and honour firmly.

REGAN	My sickness grows upon me.


Herald	[Reads]  'If any man of quality or degree within

Herald	Again!

	[Enter EDGAR, at the third sound, armed, with a

EDGAR	Know, my name is lost;
ALBANY	                  Which is that adversary?

	My oath, and my profession: I protest,
	Conspirant 'gainst this high-illustrious prince;
	To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
	And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
	Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,

	An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquish'd,
	Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil:
GONERIL	Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:

ALBANY	Go after her: she's desperate; govern her.
	That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
	If more, the more thou hast wrong'd me.
	Cost him his eyes.
ALBANY	Methought thy very gait did prophesy
EDGAR	Worthy prince, I know't.
EDGAR	By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
	Rather than die at once!--taught me to shift
	Led him, begg'd for him, saved him from despair;
	Told him my pilgrimage: but his flaw'd heart,
EDMUND	This speech of yours hath moved me,
	For I am almost ready to dissolve,
	To amplify too much, would make much more,
	Who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms
	His grief grew puissant and the strings of life

	Their manners are so apish.
	daughters thy mothers: for when thou gavest them
	Then they for sudden joy did weep,
	Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach
Fool	I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are:
	thee, nuncle; thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides,

	care for her frowning; now thou art an O without a


GONERIL	Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,
	To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,
	Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
Fool	For, you trow, nuncle,
KING LEAR	Are you our daughter?
	These dispositions, that of late transform you

	Who is it that can tell me who I am?
	marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason,
KING LEAR	Your name, fair gentlewoman?
	Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
	Without the form of justice, yet our power

GLOUCESTER	What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider
	[Servants bind him]

GLOUCESTER	By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
GLOUCESTER	Naughty lady,

CORNWALL	And what confederacy have you with the traitors
GLOUCESTER	I have a letter guessingly set down,

GLOUCESTER	To Dover.

GLOUCESTER	Because I would not see thy cruel nails
	And quench'd the stelled fires:
	The winged vengeance overtake such children.
GLOUCESTER	He that will think to live till he be old,
CORNWALL	If you see vengeance,--
	Than now to bid you hold.
	I'd shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?

	[Takes a sword, and runs at him behind]
	[Dies]

LEAR	king of Britain  (KING LEAR:)

EARL OF KENT	(KENT:)

Old Man	tenant to Gloucester.

	Gentleman attendant on Cordelia. (Gentleman:)
	(Second Servant:)
	|

	(Messenger:)




	division of the kingdom, it appears not which of
KENT	Is not this your son, my lord?

	for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed.

	fair; there was good sport at his making, and the


GLOUCESTER	He hath been out nine years, and away he shall

	[Exeunt GLOUCESTER and EDMUND]
	To shake all cares and business from our age;
	Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
	Since now we will divest us both of rule,
	Our eldest-born, speak first.
	No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
CORDELIA	[Aside]  What shall Cordelia do?
	With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
REGAN	Sir, I am made
	Myself an enemy to all other joys,
CORDELIA	[Aside]	Then poor Cordelia!
	Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom;
	Strive to be interess'd; what can you say to draw
KING LEAR	Nothing!

KING LEAR	How, how, Cordelia! mend your speech a little,
	Return those duties back as are right fit,
	Half my love with him, half my care and duty:

CORDELIA	So young, my lord, and true.
	By all the operation of the orbs
	Hold thee, from this, for ever. The barbarous Scythian,

	I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
	With my two daughters' dowers digest this third:
	With reservation of an hundred knights,
	Beloved sons, be yours: which to confirm,
KENT	Royal Lear,
KING LEAR	The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.
	Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
	Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;

KING LEAR	Out of my sight!
KING LEAR	Now, by Apollo,--
KING LEAR	O, vassal! miscreant!
ALBANY	|
KENT	Do:

	To come between our sentence and our power,
	And on the sixth to turn thy hated back





	Hath rivall'd for our daughter: what, in the least,
	I crave no more than what your highness offer'd,
	But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands:

	Dower'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
	Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!
	Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.
EDGAR	Poor Tom's a-cold.
	And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
	What is the cause of thunder?
	What is your study?


	Thou say'st the king grows mad; I'll tell thee, friend,
	The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this!

KING LEAR	Come let's in all.
	I will keep still with my philosopher.

GLOUCESTER	No words, no words: hush.




EDMUND	How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus
	brother's evil disposition made him seek his death;
	be just! This is the letter he spoke of, which
CORNWALL	o with me to the duchess.
CORNWALL	True or false, it hath made thee earl of
	stuff his suspicion more fully.--I will persevere in
	My unprovided body, lanced mine arm:

	By his authority I will proclaim it,
EDMUND	When I dissuaded him from his intent,
	Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
	And thou must make a dullard of the world,
GLOUCESTER	Strong and fasten'd villain
	Hark, the duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
	Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
CORNWALL	How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,



REGAN	No marvel, then, though he were ill affected:
	That if they come to sojourn at my house,
	A child-like office.
	This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

	So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
	Truly, however else.


EDGAR	You're much deceived: in nothing am I changed
EDGAR	Come on, sir; here's the place: stand still. How fearful
	Methinks he seems no bigger than his head:
	That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes,
GLOUCESTER	Set me where you stand.

	Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

	This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
	Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
EDGAR	Gone, sir: farewell.
	Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak!

	Ten masts at each make not the altitude

GLOUCESTER	Alack, I have no eyes.


GLOUCESTER	A poor unfortunate beggar.
	It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,
	Affliction till it do cry out itself
EDGAR	Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes here?
	His master thus.
EDGAR	O thou side-piercing sight!
	look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece of toasted

GLOUCESTER	I know that voice.
	and 'no' to every thing that I said!--'Ay' and 'no'
	not men o' their words: they told me I was every

	The wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly
	To 't, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
	The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to 't
	Beneath is all the fiends';
	good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination:
KING LEAR	Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
KING LEAR	I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny
GLOUCESTER	Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.

	a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how
KING LEAR	What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes
	a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
	mightst behold the great image of authority: a
	For which thou whipp'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
	None does offend, none, I say, none; I'll able 'em:
	Pull off my boots: harder, harder: so.
	I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester:
GLOUCESTER	Alack, alack the day!
	A troop of horse with felt: I'll put 't in proof;

	The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;


	My masters, know you that.
	shall get it with running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
	Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter,

Gentleman	Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that,



	To die before you please!


	[Enter OSWALD]
	Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out

	Lest that the infection of his fortune take
OSWALD	Let go, slave, or thou diest!
	Nay, come not near th' old man; keep out, che vor


	Upon the British party: O, untimely death!
	As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
EDGAR	Sit you down, father; rest you
	To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;
	'Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have
	the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply
	O undistinguish'd space of woman's will!
	With this ungracious paper strike the sight
CORNWALL	Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
KENT	Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My
CORNWALL	Peace, sirrah!
CORNWALL	Why art thou angry?
	Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
	Knowing nought, like dogs, but following.

KENT	No contraries hold more antipathy
KENT	His countenance likes me not.
	I have seen better faces in my time
	Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
	These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness
KENT	Sir, in good sooth, in sincere verity,
CORNWALL	What mean'st by this?
	accent was a plain knave; which for my part

	Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd,
	Drew on me here again.
CORNWALL	Fetch forth the stocks!
	Call not your stocks for me: I serve the king;




	For pilferings and most common trespasses
CORNWALL	I'll answer that.

	[Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER and KENT]


KENT	Good king, that must approve the common saw,
	Peruse this letter! Nothing almost sees miracles
	Losses their remedies. All weary and o'erwatch'd,
	[Sleeps]
	KING LEAR

	[Enter EDGAR]
	That guard, and most unusual vigilance,
	Brought near to beast: my face I'll grime with filth;
	Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
	Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,




