	Shall find thee full of labours.
	Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
KING LEAR	Let the great gods,
	Unwhipp'd of justice: hide thee, thou bloody hand;
	but a provoking merit, set a-work by a reprovable
	be just! This is the letter he spoke of, which

	mighty business in hand.
	may be ready for our apprehension.
	my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
	Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
	This office to you.
KENT	No, do not.
	As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring;

	That, when we have found the king,--in which your pain
	[Exeunt severally]

ACT III
SCENE II	Another part of the heath. Storm still.

	You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,
	Crack nature's moulds, an germens spill at once,
	house is better than this rain-water out o' door.
KING LEAR	Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!

	You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
	To him our absolute power:
		     you, to your rights:
	The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
	And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
	Look there, look there!
EDGAR	He faints! My lord, my lord!
EDGAR	Look up, my lord.
	Stretch him out longer.
KENT	The wonder is, he hath endured so long:
	Is general woe.
	Friends of my soul, you twain
	My master calls me, I must not say no.
	The oldest hath borne most: we that are young
	Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd and bold,
	Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
	And the remainder, that shall still depend,
KING LEAR	Darkness and devils!

	[Enter ALBANY]
	[To ALBANY]
	Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
ALBANY	Pray, sir, be patient.
	That all particulars of duty know,
	That, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature


	Will pack when it begins to rain,
	The knave turns fool that runs away;


	Fetch me a better answer.
	How unremoveable and fix'd he is
	Fiery? what quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,


	Fiery? the fiery duke? Tell the hot duke that--
	When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind
	For the sound man. Death on my state! wherefore
	Should he sit here? This act persuades me
	Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
GLOUCESTER	I would have all well betwixt you.
KING LEAR	O me, my heart, my rising heart! but, down!
	o' the coxcombs with a stick, and cried 'Down,
	[Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants]
CORNWALL	Hail to your grace!
REGAN	I am glad to see your highness.
	I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,

	Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here:
	I can scarce speak to thee; thou'lt not believe
	You less know how to value her desert

	'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,

	There is nothing done, if he return the conqueror:
		'Your--wife, so I would say--
	A plot upon her virtuous husband's life;
	With this ungracious paper strike the sight
GLOUCESTER	The king is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,
	May carry through itself to that full issue

	Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,

	the worst'?

Old Man	Fellow, where goest?
KING LEAR	Come let's in all.
KING LEAR	With him;







	[Enter CORNWALL and EDMUND]
EDMUND	How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus
CORNWALL	I now perceive, it was not altogether your
KING LEAR	It may be so, my lord.
	Into her womb convey sterility!
	Create her child of spleen; that it may live,
	Turn all her mother's pains and benefits



	Within a fortnight!


	Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
	And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
	When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
	Of her confine: you should be ruled and led
	Say you have wrong'd her, sir.
	'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
	Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg
	Return you to my sister.
	Look'd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,
	You taking airs, with lameness!
KING LEAR	You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames

KING LEAR	No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse:
	To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
	The offices of nature, bond of childhood,



	[Enter OSWALD]
KING LEAR	This is a slave, whose easy-borrow'd pride
CORNWALL	What means your grace?

	Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,

GONERIL	Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
KING LEAR	O sides, you are too tough;
	Deserved much less advancement.
REGAN	I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
	I am now from home, and out of that provision
	No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
	Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
	Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter

	I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
	Which I must needs call mine: thou art a boil,
	I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,
	I and my hundred knights.
	For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;

	Is it not well? What should you need of more?
	Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.

	To bring but five and twenty: to no more

	But kept a reservation to be follow'd
REGAN	And speak't again, my lord; no more with me.
	Stands in some rank of praise.
		         I'll go with thee:
GONERIL	Hear me, my lord;

	Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
	Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,
	As full of grief as age; wretched in both!
	And let not women's weapons, water-drops,
	[Exit an Officer]
	He that helps him take all my outward worth.
	The which he lacks; that to provoke in him,
CORDELIA	All blest secrets,
	Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life

CORDELIA	'Tis known before; our preparation stands
	My mourning and important tears hath pitied.




	[Enter REGAN and OSWALD]
OSWALD	Ay, madam.
OSWALD	Madam, with much ado:


	It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,

	The ways are dangerous.

	Let me unseal the letter.
REGAN	I know your lady does not love her husband;

	Therefore I do advise you, take this note:
	Remember what I tell you.
GONERIL	And let his knights have colder looks among you;
	To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.




	And woes by wrong imaginations lose

	Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.




CORDELIA	O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work,
KENT	To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid.
CORDELIA	Be better suited:
KENT	Pardon me, dear madam;



	Of this child-changed father!

Gentleman	Ay, madam; in the heaviness of his sleep
	I doubt not of his temperance.
Doctor	Please you, draw near. Louder the music there!
	Repair those violent harms that my two sisters

	To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
	Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
	'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once

	Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
CORDELIA	Sir, do you know me?
CORDELIA	Still, still, far wide!
KING LEAR	Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
	I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
	And hold your hands in benediction o'er me:
	I am a very foolish fond old man,
	Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
	Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
CORDELIA	And so I am, I am.
	I know you do not love me; for your sisters
CORDELIA	No cause, no cause.
KENT	                  In your own kingdom, sir.
Doctor	Be comforted, good madam: the great rage,
	Till further settling.
KING LEAR	You must bear with me:



KENT	Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the
	well, sir.
KENT	My point and period will be throughly wrought,

	KING LEAR



	And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.
REGAN	Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
REGAN	Now, sweet lord,

	To the forfended place?
REGAN	I am doubtful that you have been conjunct

EDMUND	Fear me not:

ALBANY	Our very loving sister, well be-met.
	I never yet was valiant: for this business,
	I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;
	A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man:
	So old and white as this. O! O! 'tis foul!
	The cod-piece that will house
	The man that makes his toe
	For there was never yet fair woman but she made
	I will say nothing.
KENT	Who's there?

	Hast practised on man's life: close pent-up guilts,

	Repose you there; while I to this hard house--
	Their scanted courtesy.
	I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
	Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart

	For the rain it raineth every day.
	[Exeunt KING LEAR and KENT]
	When priests are more in word than matter;
	When every case in law is right;
	When usurers tell their gold i' the field;
	Then comes the time, who lives to see't,
	[Exit]

ACT III
SCENE III	Gloucester's castle.

	house; charged me, on pain of their perpetual
EDMUND	Most savage and unnatural!
	received a letter this night; 'tis dangerous to be
	must incline to the king. I will seek him, and
	Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,
	[Exit]
	This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
	[Exit]

ACT III
SCENE IV	The heath. Before a hovel.




	Invades us to the skin: so 'tis to thee;
	Thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth. When the
	Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
	To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.
	No more of that.
KING LEAR	Prithee, go in thyself: seek thine own ease:
	[To the Fool]

	That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
	Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;


KENT	Give me thy hand. Who's there?
KENT	What art thou that dost grumble there i' the straw?


EDGAR	Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the foul
	in his pew; set ratsbane by his porridge; made film
	de, do de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds,

	Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all?
KING LEAR	Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air

	Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
EDGAR	Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill:

	array. Tom's a-cold.
EDGAR	A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that curled
	broke them in the sweet face of heaven: one that
	ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,
	out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen
	Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let him trot by.
KING LEAR	Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer
	no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! here's three on
	come unbutton here.
Fool	Prithee, nuncle, be contented; 'tis a naughty night

	at curfew, and walks till the first cock; he gives
	S. Withold footed thrice the old;
	And, aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!
KING LEAR	What's he?
GLOUCESTER	What are you there? Your names?
	the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
	tithing, and stock- punished, and imprisoned; who
	Have been Tom's food for seven long year.

GLOUCESTER	Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,

	And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
KING LEAR	First let me talk with this philosopher.

EDGAR	How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.
KENT	Importune him once more to go, my lord;

	He said it would be thus, poor banish'd man!
	But lately, very late: I loved him, friend;

EDGAR	Tom's a-cold.
GLOUCESTER	What, with the case of eyes?
	a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how

	thine ear: change places; and, handy-dandy, which
GLOUCESTER	Ay, sir.
	dog's obeyed in office.
	For which thou whipp'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
	Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.
	And like a scurvy politician, seem
EDGAR	O, matter and impertinency mix'd! Reason in madness!
	Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:
GLOUCESTER	Alack, alack the day!
	It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe

	Your most dear daughter--
	You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;

	Ay, and laying autumn's dust.
KING LEAR	I will die bravely, like a bridegroom. What!
Gentleman	You are a royal one, and we obey you.

	Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter,
EDGAR	Hail, gentle sir.
EDGAR	Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?

EDMUND	This speech of yours hath moved me,
ALBANY	If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
EDGAR	                  This would have seem'd a period
	Whilst I was big in clamour came there in a man,
	He fastened on my neck, and bellow'd out
	His grief grew puissant and the strings of life
ALBANY	But who was this?
	Improper for a slave.
Gentleman	Help, help, O, help!
ALBANY	Speak, man.
Gentleman	'Tis hot, it smokes;

EDMUND	I was contracted to them both: all three








	Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,

	Thy token of reprieve.


	That she fordid herself.
	[EDMUND is borne off]

	I know when one is dead, and when one lives;

	Myself could else out-frown false fortune's frown.
	We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage:
	At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
	As if we were God's spies: and we'll wear out,
EDMUND	Take them away.
	He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
	first. Come.
EDMUND	Come hither, captain; hark.

	To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men
	Or thrive by other means.
EDMUND	About it; and write happy when thou hast done.
Captain	I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;

ALBANY	Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,
	As we shall find their merits and our safety
	To send the old and miserable king
	An turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
	Where you shall hold your session. At this time
	The question of Cordelia and her father
	I hold you but a subject of this war,
	Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,
	And call itself your brother.
	More than in your addition.
	If you do find him, pray you, give him this;
	If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
	What party I do follow.
	[Exeunt]

ACT IV
SCENE VI	Fields near Dover.


	Hark, do you hear the sea?



EDMUND	I shall attend you presently at your tent.
GONERIL	No.
GONERIL	[Aside]  O, ho, I know the riddle.--I will go.
EDGAR	If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor,

	If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
	Your business of the world hath so an end,



	Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
ALBANY	We will greet the time.
EDMUND	To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
	If both remain alive: to take the widow
	His countenance for the battle; which being done,
	The battle done, and they within our power,
	[Exit]

ACT V
SCENE II	A field between the two camps.
	KING LEAR, CORDELIA, and Soldiers, over the stage;

	I'll bring you comfort.
	[Exit EDGAR]
EDGAR	Away, old man; give me thy hand; away!
GLOUCESTER	No farther, sir; a man may rot even here.
	Ripeness is all: come on.
	[Exeunt]

ACT V
SCENE III	The British camp near Dover.
	KING LEAR and CORDELIA, prisoners; Captain,
	Until their greater pleasures first be known
	He flashes into one gross crime or other,
	I will not speak with him; say I am sick:
OSWALD	He's coming, madam; I hear him.
GONERIL	Put on what weary negligence you please,
	Not to be over-ruled. Idle old man,
	With cheques as flatteries,--when they are seen abused.
	Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy

	Without our grace, our love, our benison.
	REGAN, and CORDELIA]
CORDELIA	The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
	To your professed bosoms I commit him

	Be to content your lord, who hath received you
CORDELIA	Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides:
KING OF FRANCE	Come, my fair Cordelia.
GONERIL	Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what
REGAN	That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
	little: he always loved our sister most; and
REGAN	'Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever
	rash; then must we look to receive from his age,

GONERIL	There is further compliment of leavetaking
	surrender of his will but offend us.
GONERIL	We must do something, and i' the heat.




	My services are bound. Wherefore should I
	Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
	With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
	Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops,
	As to the legitimate: fine word,--legitimate!
	Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
GLOUCESTER	Kent banish'd thus! and France in choler parted!




	if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.
	and for so much as I have perused, I find it not

GLOUCESTER	Let's see, let's see.

	them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage
	would sleep till I waked him, you should half his
	Hum--conspiracy!--'Sleep till I waked him,--you
	brought it?
	casement of my closet.
EDMUND	If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear
GLOUCESTER	It is his.

	maintain it to be fit, that, sons at perfect age,
GLOUCESTER	O villain, villain! His very opinion in the
	Where is he?
	brother till you can derive from him better
	gap in your own honour, and shake in pieces the
	I have full cause of weeping; but this heart
	[Exeunt KING LEAR, GLOUCESTER, KENT, and Fool]
CORNWALL	Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.

REGAN	For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
	Where is my lord of Gloucester?
	[Re-enter GLOUCESTER]
CORNWALL	Whither is he going?
CORNWALL	'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
GLOUCESTER	Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
REGAN	O, sir, to wilful men,
	And what they may incense him to, being apt
	My Regan counsels well; come out o' the storm.



	[Storm still. Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting]
Gentleman	One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
Gentleman	Contending with the fretful element:
	Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
	This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,

	His heart-struck injuries.
	Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
	Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,
	Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
	Into this scatter'd kingdom; who already,
	If on my credit you dare build so far
	My unprovided body, lanced mine arm:
	Full suddenly he fled.
	And found--dispatch. The noble duke my master,
	Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
	And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
	Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
	To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:
	To make thee seek it.'

	All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not 'scape;
	Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means

REGAN	If it be true, all vengeance comes too short

GLOUCESTER	O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid!


	I have this present evening from my sister


	This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
GLOUCESTER	                  Ay, my good lord.
	How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
	You we first seize on.


	Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
	Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow
GLOUCESTER	I serve you, madam:

	KING LEAR


OSWALD	Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?
OSWALD	Where may we set our horses?
OSWALD	Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
OSWALD	Why, then, I care not for thee.


	base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited,
	one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a
	will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deniest
	on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
	thy heels, and beat thee before the king? Draw, you


	carbonado your shanks: draw, you rascal; come your ways.
KENT	Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat

	REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants]
KENT	With you, goodman boy, an you please: come, I'll

REGAN	The messengers from our sister and the king.
OSWALD	I am scarce in breath, my lord.
	tailor made thee.
KENT	Ay, a tailor, sir: a stone-cutter or painter could
	[Exeunt]

ACT IV
SCENE III	The French camp near Dover.

Gentleman	Something he left imperfect in the
	most required and necessary.
Gentleman	The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.

	Over her passion; who, most rebel-like,

	Were like a better way: those happy smilets,
	Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,

	Kent! father! sisters! What, i' the storm? i' the night?
	To deal with grief alone.
	Else one self mate and mate could not beget


	Will yield to see his daughter.
KENT	A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness,
	His mind so venomously, that burning shame


	When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
	[Exeunt]
	KING LEAR


CORDELIA	Alack, 'tis he: why, he was met even now
	Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow


REGAN	Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
	Witness the world, that I create thee here




	I bar it in the interest of my wife:
	My lady is bespoke.
ALBANY	Thou art arm'd, Gloucester: let the trumpet sound:

	Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less


	That names me traitor, villain-like he lies:





Captain	Sound, trumpet!
Herald	[Reads]  'If any man of quality or degree within
	trumpet: he is bold in his defence.'
	[First trumpet]
	[Second trumpet]
	[Third trumpet]
	[Enter EDGAR, at the third sound, armed, with a
	Upon this call o' the trumpet.
	This present summons?
	Yet am I noble as the adversary


	Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
	Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor;
	To the descent and dust below thy foot,
	Thou liest.
	And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
	With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;


	But cozen'd and beguiled.
	Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil:

ALBANY	Most monstrous! oh!


	That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
	I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
	Make instruments to plague us:
EDMUND	                  Thou hast spoken right, 'tis true;
	A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:
EDGAR	Worthy prince, I know't.

	That follow'd me so near,--O, our lives' sweetness!
	That very dogs disdain'd: and in this habit
	Never,--O fault!--reveal'd myself unto him,
	Told him my pilgrimage: but his flaw'd heart,
Gentleman	Near and on speedy foot; the main descry

EDGAR	I thank you, sir.
GLOUCESTER	You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me:
EDGAR	Well pray you, father.
EDGAR	A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows;


	That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh

	[EDGAR interposes]
	Lest that the infection of his fortune take

	pass. An chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life,
	the harder: ch'ill be plain with you.
EDGAR	Ch'ill pick your teeth, zir: come; no matter vor


	It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows


	What is't thou say'st? Her voice was ever soft,
Captain	'Tis true, my lords, he did.
	I would have made them skip: I am old now,
KENT	If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,

KING LEAR	He's a good fellow, I can tell you that;

	Have follow'd your sad steps.
KENT	Nor no man else: all's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
KING LEAR	Ay, so I think.




	and says little; to fear judgment; to fight when I

	king, thou art poor enough. What wouldst thou?
KING LEAR	Who wouldst thou serve?
KING LEAR	Dost thou know me, fellow?


	tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message
KING LEAR	How old art thou?
	on my back forty eight.
	Dinner, ho, dinner! Where's my knave? my fool?






	not.
Knight	My lord, I know not what the matter is; but, to my
	general dependants as in the duke himself also and


	than as a very pretence and purpose of unkindness:
Knight	Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the
	tell my daughter I would speak with her.
	Go you, call hither my fool.
	[Re-enter OSWALD]

	whoreson dog! you slave! you cur!
KING LEAR	Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
OSWALD	I'll not be struck, my lord.
	[Tripping up his heels]

	wisdom? so.
KING LEAR	Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there's




	why, this fellow has banished two on's daughters,

	myself. There's mine; beg another of thy daughters.
Fool	Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped


	Lend less than thou owest,
	Leave thy drink and thy whore,

	gave me nothing for't. Can you make no use of

KING LEAR	A bitter fool!

	To give away thy land,
	Will presently appear;
KING LEAR	Dost thou call me fool, boy?

	I had a monopoly out, they would have part on't:

	up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou
	when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak
	[Singing]
	your foins.
OSWALD	Slave, thou hast slain me: villain, take my purse:
	Upon the British party: O, untimely death!
EDGAR	I know thee well: a serviceable villain;
GLOUCESTER	What, is he dead?
	May be my friends. He's dead; I am only sorry
	Their papers, is more lawful.
	'Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have
	Fools had ne'er less wit in a year;

	daughters thy mothers: for when thou gavest them

	And go the fools among.

	they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt
	thee, nuncle; thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides,
	[Enter GONERIL]

	thou art nothing.
	Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue; so your face


	In rank and not-to-be endured riots. Sir,
	That you protect this course, and put it on
	Might in their working do you that offence,
Fool	For, you trow, nuncle,

	I would you would make use of that good wisdom,

KING LEAR	Doth any here know me? This is not Lear:
	Who is it that can tell me who I am?
KING LEAR	I would learn that; for, by the
Fool	Which they will make an obedient father.
GONERIL	This admiration, sir, is much o' the savour
EDMUND	Spake you with him?
EDMUND	Parted you in good terms? Found you no

	his displeasure; which at this instant so rageth
EDGAR	Some villain hath done me wrong.
	slower; and, as I say, retire with me to my

	am no honest man if there be any good meaning


	Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
	All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.





	If this man come to good.
	Women will all turn monsters.
	Allows itself to any thing.




	[Enter EDGAR]
	The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
	Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace!
	[Enter GLOUCESTER, led by an Old Man]
	Lie would not yield to age.


	pretence of danger.
EDMUND	If your honour judge it meet, I will place you


	business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
	business as I shall find means and acquaint you withal.
	reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself
	palaces, treason; and the bond cracked 'twixt son
	child. We have seen the best of our time:
	lose thee nothing; do it carefully. And the
	[Exit]
	of our own behavior,--we make guilty of our
	treachers, by spherical predominance; drunkards,
	of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish
	major; so that it follows, I am rough and

	comedy: my cue is villanous melancholy, with a
EDGAR	How now, brother Edmund! what serious
	this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
EDMUND	I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed
	maledictions against king and nobles; needless
EDGAR	How long have you been a sectary astronomical?









	A Herald.
	(Second Servant:)
GONERIL	|
CORDELIA	|
	Soldiers, and Attendants


	KING LEAR


KENT	I thought the king had more affected the Duke of
	division of the kingdom, it appears not which of

	so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am

	Do you smell a fault?

	world before he was sent for, yet was his mother

	honourable friend.
KENT	I must love you, and sue to know you better.
GLOUCESTER	He hath been out nine years, and away he shall
	GONERIL, REGAN, CORDELIA, and Attendants]
GLOUCESTER	I shall, my liege.
KING LEAR	Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
	Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
	Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
	And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters,--
	That we our largest bounty may extend
GONERIL	Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
	As much as child e'er loved, or father found;
CORDELIA	[Aside]  What shall Cordelia do?
	With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
	Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
	And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
	Which the most precious square of sense possesses;
CORDELIA	[Aside]	Then poor Cordelia!
KING LEAR	To thee and thine hereditary ever
	Although the last, not least; to whose young love




CORDELIA	Good my lord,
	Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
	Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters,


	For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
	Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
	Or he that makes his generation messes

	Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
	Her father's heart from her! Call France; who stirs?
	I do invest you jointly with my power,


GONERIL	Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho!
	You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
	A fox, when one has caught her,
	So the fool follows after.
GONERIL	This man hath had good counsel:--a hundred knights!
	He may enguard his dotage with their powers,

	What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister
	[Re-enter OSWALD]

	Inform her full of my particular fear;

	This milky gentleness and course of yours

GONERIL	Nay, then--
	[Exeunt]

ACT I
SCENE V	Court before the same.

	If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.

	danger of kibes?
Fool	Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall ne'er go


	crab. Thou canst tell why one's nose stands i'

KING LEAR	I did her wrong--
KING LEAR	No.
KING LEAR	Why?

Fool	Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the


KING LEAR	How's that?

	[Enter Gentleman]
Gentleman	Ready, my lord.
Fool	She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure,

	KING LEAR


EDMUND	Save thee, Curan.
	his duchess will be here with him this night.
CURAN	Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad;
EDMUND	Not I	pray you, what are they?


	This weaves itself perforce into my business.
	Brother, a word; descend: brother, I say!
	My father watches: O sir, fly this place;
	He's coming hither: now, i' the night, i' the haste,

	In cunning I must draw my sword upon you


	Do more than this in sport. Father, father!

	Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon




	Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond

GLOUCESTER	So may it be, indeed:
EDGAR	You're much deceived: in nothing am I changed

	Show scarce so gross as beetles: half way down
	Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
	Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more;
GLOUCESTER	Set me where you stand.
	Would I not leap upright.
	Well worth a poor man's taking: fairies and gods
EDGAR	Now fare you well, good sir.
EDGAR	Why I do trifle thus with his despair
	This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
	My snuff and loathed part of nature should
	[He falls forward]
	The treasury of life, when life itself
	Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.

	Hast heavy substance; bleed'st not; speak'st; art sound.

	Look up a-height; the shrill-gorged lark so far
	Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,

GLOUCESTER	Too well, too well.
	Which parted from you?
EDGAR	As I stood here below, methought his eyes
	Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
	Affliction till it do cry out itself


KING LEAR	No, they cannot touch me for coining; I am the

	look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece of toasted
	Give the word.
KING LEAR	Pass.
KING LEAR	Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered
	too was no good divinity. When the rain came to
	not men o' their words: they told me I was every
	Is 't not the king?
	I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause? Adultery?
	Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester's bastard son
	Behold yond simpering dame,
	The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to 't
	But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
	Burning, scalding, stench, consumption; fie,


KING LEAR	I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny

	And my heart breaks at it.

	I' the last night's storm I such a fellow saw;
	more since.
EDGAR	[Aside]	How should this be?
GLOUCESTER	Is that the naked fellow?

	KING LEAR


GLOUCESTER	Here is better than the open air; take it
KENT	All the power of his wits have given way to his


KING LEAR	A king, a king!
	before him.

	horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
	[To EDGAR]
	[To the Fool]
EDGAR	   Look, where he stands and glares!
Fool	   Her boat hath a leak,
EDGAR	The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a

KING LEAR	I'll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.
	Thou robed man of justice, take thy place;
	And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,

EDGAR	Let us deal justly.
	Thy sheep shall take no harm.
	oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the


	False justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?
KENT	O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,
	They'll mar my counterfeiting.

	Mastiff, grey-hound, mongrel grim,
	For, with throwing thus my head,


	do not like the fashion of your garments: you will

Fool	And I'll go to bed at noon.
GLOUCESTER	Come hither, friend: where is the king my master?
GLOUCESTER	Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms;
	Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master:
	And follow me, that will to some provision
	This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
	[To the Fool]


	Leaving free things and happy shows behind:
	When that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
	In thy just proof, repeals and reconciles thee.
	[Exit]

ACT III
SCENE VII	Gloucester's castle.



	sister company: the revenges we are bound to take
	like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent
	[Enter OSWALD]
OSWALD	My lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence:
	Are gone with him towards Dover; where they boast


	Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
	Though well we may not pass upon his life


	You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.
	[Servants bind him]
GLOUCESTER	Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.
	[REGAN plucks his beard]

	These hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,


REGAN	To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king? Speak.
	And not from one opposed.
REGAN	And false.
GLOUCESTER	To Dover.
CORNWALL	Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.
REGAN	Wherefore to Dover, sir?
	In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
	Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
	The winged vengeance overtake such children.

REGAN	One side will mock another; the other too.
First Servant	Hold your hand, my lord:

	I'd shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?
	[They draw and fight]
REGAN	Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!
First Servant	O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left

GLOUCESTER	All dark and comfortless. Where's my son Edmund?
REGAN	Out, treacherous villain!

REGAN	Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell

	Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave
	[Exit CORNWALL, led by REGAN]
	The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
	[Giving the crown]
	Loved as my father, as my master follow'd,

	Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
	This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgment,

	To wage against thy enemies; nor fear to lose it,

KING LEAR	Now, by Apollo,--


CORNWALL	|
	Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow

	Which we durst never yet, and with strain'd pride
	Five days we do allot thee, for provision
	Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
KENT	Fare thee well, king: sith thus thou wilt appear,

	[To REGAN and GONERIL]
	Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;

GLOUCESTER	Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
	Hath rivall'd for our daughter: what, in the least,
BURGUNDY	Most royal majesty,
KING LEAR	Right noble Burgundy,
	Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,
BURGUNDY	I know no answer.
	Dower'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
	Election makes not up on such conditions.

	I would not from your love make such a stray,
	Almost to acknowledge hers.
	The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
	Must be of such unnatural degree,
	Could never plant in me.
	To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,
	That hath deprived me of your grace and favour;
	Hath lost me in your liking.

	What say you to the lady? Love's not love

	Duchess of Burgundy.
BURGUNDY	I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
	Since that respects of fortune are his love,
	Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised!
	My love should kindle to inflamed respect.

	And bring some covering for this naked soul,


	[Exit]
EDGAR	Poor Tom's a-cold.
	I cannot daub it further.
EDGAR	[Aside]  And yet I must.--Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
EDGAR	Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor
	Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of

	Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
	And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
GLOUCESTER	There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
	With something rich about me: from that place
	Poor Tom shall lead thee.




	Not met us on the way.
		 Now, where's your master'?
	He smiled at it: I told him you were coming:
	And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out:
GONERIL	[To EDMUND]  Then shall you go no further.
	May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;
	Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear,
	[Giving a favour]
	Conceive, and fare thee well.
GONERIL	My most dear Gloucester!
	O, the difference of man and man!
OSWALD	Madam, here comes my lord.
	[Enter ALBANY]
ALBANY	O Goneril!
	Cannot be border'd certain in itself;

	Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
	Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.
	Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,

	Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st
	With plumed helm thy slayer begins threats;
ALBANY	See thyself, devil!
GONERIL	O vain fool!
	To let these hands obey my blood,


	Slain by his servant, going to put out

	Flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
ALBANY	This shows you are above,


	Upon my hateful life: another way,



	And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
	To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king,
CORNWALL	Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?

	a jakes with him. Spare my gray beard, you wagtail?


	Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
	With every gale and vary of their masters,
	Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,

	Than I and such a knave.
KENT	His countenance likes me not.
KENT	Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain:

	Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
	Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
KENT	Sir, in good sooth, in sincere verity,

	discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no
	to entreat me to 't.
OSWALD	I never gave him any:
	Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd,
	And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
	But Ajax is their fool.
	We'll teach you--
	On whose employment I was sent to you:

REGAN	Till noon! till night, my lord; and all night too.

	Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
GLOUCESTER	Let me beseech your grace not to do so:
	For pilferings and most common trespasses

	To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,



	Give you good morrow!
	[Exit]
	To the warm sun!
	But misery: I know 'tis from Cordelia,
	Losses their remedies. All weary and o'erwatch'd,




	[Enter EDGAR]
	Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place,
	To take the basest and most poorest shape
	And with presented nakedness out-face
	Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
	Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
	[Exit]

ACT II
SCENE IV	Before GLOUCESTER's castle. KENT in the stocks.

Gentleman	As I learn'd,
KENT	                  Hail to thee, noble master!

	by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by

KENT	                  It is both he and she;




	They could not, would not do 't; 'tis worse than murder,
	Coming from us.
	Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
	Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
	The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
	Display'd so saucily against your highness,--
	The shame which here it suffers.
	Do make their children blind;
	Ne'er turns the key to the poor.
KING LEAR	O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
KENT	With the earl, sir, here within.


Fool	And thou hadst been set i' the stocks for that

	there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him
	hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man
